VOLUME I.
CHAPTER I.
WHICH TREATS OF THE CHARACTER AND PURSUITS OF THE FAMOUS GENTLEMAN DON
QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA
In a village of La Mancha, the name of which I have no desire to call to mind, there
lived not long since one of those gentlemen that keep a lance in the lance-rack, an old
buckler, a lean hack, and a greyhound for coursing. An olla of rather more beef than
mutton, a salad on most nights, scraps on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, and a pigeon
or so extra on Sundays, made away with three-quarters of his income. The rest of it
went in a doublet of fine cloth and velvet breeches and shoes to match for holidays,
while on week-days he made a brave figure in his best homespun. He had in his house
a housekeeper past forty, a niece under twenty, and a lad for the field and marketplace, who used to saddle the hack as well as handle the bill-hook. The age of this
gentleman of ours was bordering on fifty; he was of a hardy habit, spare, gauntfeatured, a very early riser and a great sportsman. They will have it his surname was
Quixada or Quesada (for here there is some difference of opinion among the authors
who write on the subject), although from reasonable conjectures it seems plain that he
was called Quexana. This, however, is of but little importance to our tale; it will be
enough not to stray a hair's breadth from the truth in the telling of it.
You must know, then, that the above-named gentleman whenever he was at leisure
(which was mostly all the year round) gave himself up to reading books of chivalry
with such ardour and avidity that he almost entirely neglected the pursuit of his fieldsports, and even the management of his property; and to such a pitch did his eagerness
and infatuation go that he sold many an acre of tillageland to buy books of chivalry to
read, and brought home as many of them as he could get. But of all there were none
he liked so well as those of the famous Feliciano de Silva's composition, for their
lucidity of style and complicated conceits were as pearls in his sight, particularly
when in his reading he came upon courtships and cartels, where he often found
passages like "the reason of the unreason with which my reason is afflicted so
weakens my reason that with reason I murmur at your beauty;" or again, "the high
heavens, that of your divinity divinely fortify you with the stars, render you deserving
of the desert your greatness deserves." Over conceits of this sort the poor gentleman
lost his wits, and used to lie awake striving to understand them and worm the meaning
out of them; what Aristotle himself could not have made out or extracted had he come
to life again for that special purpose. He was not at all easy about the wounds which
Don Belianis gave and took, because it seemed to him that, great as were the surgeons
who had cured him, he must have had his face and body covered all over with seams
and scars. He commended, however, the author's way of ending his book with the
promise of that interminable adventure, and many a time was he tempted to take up
his pen and finish it properly as is there proposed, which no doubt he would have
done, and made a successful piece of work of it too, had not greater and more
absorbing thoughts prevented him.
Many an argument did he have with the curate of his village (a learned man, and a
graduate of Siguenza) as to which had been the better knight, Palmerin of England or
Amadis of Gaul. Master Nicholas, the village barber, however, used to say that neither
of them came up to the Knight of Phoebus, and that if there was any that could
compare with him it was Don Galaor, the brother of Amadis of Gaul, because he had a
spirit that was equal to every occasion, and was no finikin knight, nor lachrymose like
his brother, while in the matter of valour he was not a whit behind him. In short, he
became so absorbed in his books that he spent his nights from sunset to sunrise, and
his days from dawn to dark, poring over them; and what with little sleep and much
reading his brains got so dry that he lost his wits. His fancy grew full of what he used
to read about in his books, enchantments, quarrels, battles, challenges, wounds,
wooings, loves, agonies, and all sorts of impossible nonsense; and it so possessed his
mind that the whole fabric of invention and fancy he read of was true, that to him no
history in the world had more reality in it. He used to say the Cid Ruy Diaz was a very
good knight, but that he was not to be compared with the Knight of the Burning
Sword who with one back-stroke cut in half two fierce and monstrous giants. He
thought more of Bernardo del Carpio because at Roncesvalles he slew Roland in spite
of enchantments, availing himself of the artifice of Hercules when he strangled
Antaeus the son of Terra in his arms. He approved highly of the giant Morgante,
because, although of the giant breed which is always arrogant and ill-conditioned, he
alone was affable and well-bred. But above all he admired Reinaldos of Montalban,
especially when he saw him sallying forth from his castle and robbing everyone he
met, and when beyond the seas he stole that image of Mahomet which, as his history
says, was entirely of gold. To have a bout of kicking at that traitor of a Ganelon he
would have given his housekeeper, and his niece into the bargain.
In short, his wits being quite gone, he hit upon the strangest notion that ever madman
in this world hit upon, and that was that he fancied it was right and requisite, as well
for the support of his own honour as for the service of his country, that he should
make a knight-errant of himself, roaming the world over in full armour and on
horseback in quest of adventures, and putting in practice himself all that he had read
of as being the usual practices of knights-errant; righting every kind of wrong, and
exposing himself to peril and danger from which, in the issue, he was to reap eternal
renown and fame. Already the poor man saw himself crowned by the might of his arm
Emperor of Trebizond at least; and so, led away by the intense enjoyment he found in
these pleasant fancies, he set himself forthwith to put his scheme into execution.
The first thing he did was to clean up some armour that had belonged to his greatgrandfather, and had been for ages lying forgotten in a corner eaten with rust and
covered with mildew. He scoured and polished it as best he could, but he perceived
one great defect in it, that it had no closed helmet, nothing but a simple morion. This
deficiency, however, his ingenuity supplied, for he contrived a kind of half-helmet of
pasteboard which, fitted on to the morion, looked like a whole one. It is true that, in
order to see if it was strong and fit to stand a cut, he drew his sword and gave it a
couple of slashes, the first of which undid in an instant what had taken him a week to
do. The ease with which he had knocked it to pieces disconcerted him somewhat, and
to guard against that danger he set to work again, fixing bars of iron on the inside until
he was satisfied with its strength; and then, not caring to try any more experiments
with it, he passed it and adopted it as a helmet of the most perfect construction.
He next proceeded to inspect his hack, which, with more quartos than a real and more
blemishes than the steed of Gonela, that "tantum pellis et ossa fuit," surpassed in his
eyes the Bucephalus of Alexander or the Babieca of the Cid. Four days were spent in
thinking what name to give him, because (as he said to himself) it was not right that a
horse belonging to a knight so famous, and one with such merits of his own, should be
without some distinctive name, and he strove to adapt it so as to indicate what he had
been before belonging to a knight-errant, and what he then was; for it was only
reasonable that, his master taking a new character, he should take a new name, and
that it should be a distinguished and full-sounding one, befitting the new order and
calling he was about to follow. And so, after having composed, struck out, rejected,
added to, unmade, and remade a multitude of names out of his memory and fancy, he
decided upon calling him Rocinante, a name, to his thinking, lofty, sonorous, and
significant of his condition as a hack before he became what he now was, the first and
foremost of all the hacks in the world.
Having got a name for his horse so much to his taste, he was anxious to get one for
himself, and he was eight days more pondering over this point, till at last he made up
his mind to call himself "Don Quixote," whence, as has been already said, the authors
of this veracious history have inferred that his name must have been beyond a doubt
Quixada, and not Quesada as others would have it. Recollecting, however, that the
valiant Amadis was not content to call himself curtly Amadis and nothing more, but
added the name of his kingdom and country to make it famous, and called himself
Amadis of Gaul, he, like a good knight, resolved to add on the name of his, and to
style himself Don Quixote of La Mancha, whereby, he considered, he described
accurately his origin and country, and did honour to it in taking his surname from it.
So then, his armour being furbished, his morion turned into a helmet, his hack
christened, and he himself confirmed, he came to the conclusion that nothing more
was needed now but to look out for a lady to be in love with; for a knight-errant
without love was like a tree without leaves or fruit, or a body without a soul. As he
said to himself, "If, for my sins, or by my good fortune, I come across some giant
hereabouts, a common occurrence with knights-errant, and overthrow him in one
onslaught, or cleave him asunder to the waist, or, in short, vanquish and subdue him,
will it not be well to have some one I may send him to as a present, that he may come
in and fall on his knees before my sweet lady, and in a humble, submissive voice say,
'I am the giant Caraculiambro, lord of the island of Malindrania, vanquished in single
combat by the never sufficiently extolled knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, who has
commanded me to present myself before your Grace, that your Highness dispose of
me at your pleasure'?" Oh, how our good gentleman enjoyed the delivery of this
speech, especially when he had thought of some one to call his Lady! There was, so
the story goes, in a village near his own a very good-looking farm-girl with whom he
had been at one time in love, though, so far as is known, she never knew it nor gave a
thought to the matter. Her name was Aldonza Lorenzo, and upon her he thought fit to
confer the title of Lady of his Thoughts; and after some search for a name which
should not be out of harmony with her own, and should suggest and indicate that of a
princess and great lady, he decided upon calling her Dulcinea del Toboso—she being
of El Toboso—a name, to his mind, musical, uncommon, and significant, like all
those he had already bestowed upon himself and the things belonging to him.
CHAPTER II.
WHICH TREATS OF THE FIRST SALLY THE INGENIOUS DON QUIXOTE MADE FROM HOME
These preliminaries settled, he did not care to put off any longer the execution of his
design, urged on to it by the thought of all the world was losing by his delay, seeing
what wrongs he intended to right, grievances to redress, injustices to repair, abuses to
remove, and duties to discharge. So, without giving notice of his intention to anyone,
and without anybody seeing him, one morning before the dawning of the day (which
was one of the hottest of the month of July) he donned his suit of armour, mounted
Rocinante with his patched-up helmet on, braced his buckler, took his lance, and by
the back door of the yard sallied forth upon the plain in the highest contentment and
satisfaction at seeing with what ease he had made a beginning with his grand purpose.
But scarcely did he find himself upon the open plain, when a terrible thought struck
him, one all but enough to make him abandon the enterprise at the very outset. It
occurred to him that he had not been dubbed a knight, and that according to the law of
chivalry he neither could nor ought to bear arms against any knight; and that even if
he had been, still he ought, as a novice knight, to wear white armour, without a device
upon the shield until by his prowess he had earned one. These reflections made him
waver in his purpose, but his craze being stronger than any reasoning, he made up his
mind to have himself dubbed a knight by the first one he came across, following the
example of others in the same case, as he had read in the books that brought him to
this pass. As for white armour, he resolved, on the first opportunity, to scour his until
it was whiter than an ermine; and so comforting himself he pursued his way, taking
that which his horse chose, for in this he believed lay the essence of adventures.
Thus setting out, our new-fledged adventurer paced along, talking to himself and
saying, "Who knows but that in time to come, when the veracious history of my
famous deeds is made known, the sage who writes it, when he has to set forth my first
sally in the early morning, will do it after this fashion? 'Scarce had the rubicund
Apollo spread o'er the face of the broad spacious earth the golden threads of his bright
hair, scarce had the little birds of painted plumage attuned their notes to hail with
dulcet and mellifluous harmony the coming of the rosy Dawn, that, deserting the soft
couch of her jealous spouse, was appearing to mortals at the gates and balconies of the
Manchegan horizon, when the renowned knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, quitting
the lazy down, mounted his celebrated steed Rocinante and began to traverse the
ancient and famous Campo de Montiel;'" which in fact he was actually traversing.
"Happy the age, happy the time," he continued, "in which shall be made known my
deeds of fame, worthy to be moulded in brass, carved in marble, limned in pictures,
for a memorial for ever. And thou, O sage magician, whoever thou art, to whom it
shall fall to be the chronicler of this wondrous history, forget not, I entreat thee, my
good Rocinante, the constant companion of my ways and wanderings." Presently he
broke out again, as if he were love-stricken in earnest, "O Princess Dulcinea, lady of
this captive heart, a grievous wrong hast thou done me to drive me forth with scorn,
and with inexorable obduracy banish me from the presence of thy beauty. O lady,
deign to hold in remembrance this heart, thy vassal, that thus in anguish pines for love
of thee."
So he went on stringing together these and other absurdities, all in the style of those
his books had taught him, imitating their language as well as he could; and all the
while he rode so slowly and the sun mounted so rapidly and with such fervour that it
was enough to melt his brains if he had any. Nearly all day he travelled without
anything remarkable happening to him, at which he was in despair, for he was anxious
to encounter some one at once upon whom to try the might of his strong arm.
Writers there are who say the first adventure he met with was that of Puerto Lapice;
others say it was that of the windmills; but what I have ascertained on this point, and
what I have found written in the annals of La Mancha, is that he was on the road all
day, and towards nightfall his hack and he found themselves dead tired and hungry,
when, looking all around to see if he could discover any castle or shepherd's shanty
where he might refresh himself and relieve his sore wants, he perceived not far out of
his road an inn, which was as welcome as a star guiding him to the portals, if not the
palaces, of his redemption; and quickening his pace he reached it just as night was
setting in. At the door were standing two young women, girls of the district as they
call them, on their way to Seville with some carriers who had chanced to halt that
night at the inn; and as, happen what might to our adventurer, everything he saw or
imaged seemed to him to be and to happen after the fashion of what he read of, the
moment he saw the inn he pictured it to himself as a castle with its four turrets and
pinnacles of shining silver, not forgetting the drawbridge and moat and all the
belongings usually ascribed to castles of the sort. To this inn, which to him seemed a
castle, he advanced, and at a short distance from it he checked Rocinante, hoping that
some dwarf would show himself upon the battlements, and by sound of trumpet give
notice that a knight was approaching the castle. But seeing that they were slow about
it, and that Rocinante was in a hurry to reach the stable, he made for the inn door, and
perceived the two gay damsels who were standing there, and who seemed to him to be
two fair maidens or lovely ladies taking their ease at the castle gate.
At this moment it so happened that a swineherd who was going through the stubbles
collecting a drove of pigs (for, without any apology, that is what they are called) gave
a blast of his horn to bring them together, and forthwith it seemed to Don Quixote to
be what he was expecting, the signal of some dwarf announcing his arrival; and so
with prodigious satisfaction he rode up to the inn and to the ladies, who, seeing a man
of this sort approaching in full armour and with lance and buckler, were turning in
dismay into the inn, when Don Quixote, guessing their fear by their flight, raising his
pasteboard visor, disclosed his dry dusty visage, and with courteous bearing and
gentle voice addressed them, "Your ladyships need not fly or fear any rudeness, for
that it belongs not to the order of knighthood which I profess to offer to anyone, much
less to highborn maidens as your appearance proclaims you to be." The girls were
looking at him and straining their eyes to make out the features which the clumsy
visor obscured, but when they heard themselves called maidens, a thing so much out
of their line, they could not restrain their laughter, which made Don Quixote wax
indignant, and say, "Modesty becomes the fair, and moreover laughter that has little
cause is great silliness; this, however, I say not to pain or anger you, for my desire is
none other than to serve you."
The incomprehensible language and the unpromising looks of our cavalier only
increased the ladies' laughter, and that increased his irritation, and matters might have
gone farther if at that moment the landlord had not come out, who, being a very fat
man, was a very peaceful one. He, seeing this grotesque figure clad in armour that did
not match any more than his saddle, bridle, lance, buckler, or corselet, was not at all
indisposed to join the damsels in their manifestations of amusement; but, in truth,
standing in awe of such a complicated armament, he thought it best to speak him
fairly, so he said, "Senor Caballero, if your worship wants lodging, bating the bed (for
there is not one in the inn) there is plenty of everything else here." Don Quixote,
observing the respectful bearing of the Alcaide of the fortress (for so innkeeper and
inn seemed in his eyes), made answer, "Sir Castellan, for me anything will suffice, for
'My armour is my only wear,
My only rest the fray.'"
The host fancied he called him Castellan because he took him for a "worthy of
Castile," though he was in fact an Andalusian, and one from the strand of San Lucar,
as crafty a thief as Cacus and as full of tricks as a student or a page. "In that case,"
said he,
"'Your bed is on the flinty rock,
Your sleep to watch alway;'
and if so, you may dismount and safely reckon upon any quantity of sleeplessness
under this roof for a twelvemonth, not to say for a single night." So saying, he
advanced to hold the stirrup for Don Quixote, who got down with great difficulty and
exertion (for he had not broken his fast all day), and then charged the host to take
great care of his horse, as he was the best bit of flesh that ever ate bread in this world.
The landlord eyed him over but did not find him as good as Don Quixote said, nor
even half as good; and putting him up in the stable, he returned to see what might be
wanted by his guest, whom the damsels, who had by this time made their peace with
him, were now relieving of his armour. They had taken off his breastplate and
backpiece, but they neither knew nor saw how to open his gorget or remove his makeshift helmet, for he had fastened it with green ribbons, which, as there was no untying
the knots, required to be cut. This, however, he would not by any means consent to, so
he remained all the evening with his helmet on, the drollest and oddest figure that can
be imagined; and while they were removing his armour, taking the baggages who
were about it for ladies of high degree belonging to the castle, he said to them with
great sprightliness:
"Oh, never, surely, was there knight
 So served by hand of dame,
As served was he, Don Quixote hight,
 When from his town he came;
With maidens waiting on himself,
 Princesses on his hack—
or Rocinante, for that, ladies mine, is my horse's name, and Don Quixote of La
Mancha is my own; for though I had no intention of declaring myself until my
achievements in your service and honour had made me known, the necessity of
adapting that old ballad of Lancelot to the present occasion has given you the
knowledge of my name altogether prematurely. A time, however, will come for your
ladyships to command and me to obey, and then the might of my arm will show my
desire to serve you."
The girls, who were not used to hearing rhetoric of this sort, had nothing to say in
reply; they only asked him if he wanted anything to eat. "I would gladly eat a bit of
something," said Don Quixote, "for I feel it would come very seasonably." The day
happened to be a Friday, and in the whole inn there was nothing but some pieces of
the fish they call in Castile "abadejo," in Andalusia "bacallao," and in some places
"curadillo," and in others "troutlet;" so they asked him if he thought he could eat
troutlet, for there was no other fish to give him. "If there be troutlets enough," said
Don Quixote, "they will be the same thing as a trout; for it is all one to me whether I
am given eight reals in small change or a piece of eight; moreover, it may be that
these troutlets are like veal, which is better than beef, or kid, which is better than goat.
But whatever it be let it come quickly, for the burden and pressure of arms cannot be
borne without support to the inside." They laid a table for him at the door of the inn
for the sake of the air, and the host brought him a portion of ill-soaked and worse
cooked stockfish, and a piece of bread as black and mouldy as his own armour; but a
laughable sight it was to see him eating, for having his helmet on and the beaver up,
he could not with his own hands put anything into his mouth unless some one else
placed it there, and this service one of the ladies rendered him. But to give him
anything to drink was impossible, or would have been so had not the landlord bored a
reed, and putting one end in his mouth poured the wine into him through the other; all
which he bore with patience rather than sever the ribbons of his helmet.
While this was going on there came up to the inn a sowgelder, who, as he approached,
sounded his reed pipe four or five times, and thereby completely convinced Don
Quixote that he was in some famous castle, and that they were regaling him with
music, and that the stockfish was trout, the bread the whitest, the wenches ladies, and
the landlord the castellan of the castle; and consequently he held that his enterprise
and sally had been to some purpose. But still it distressed him to think he had not been
dubbed a knight, for it was plain to him he could not lawfully engage in any adventure
without receiving the order of knighthood.
CHAPTER III.
WHEREIN IS RELATED THE DROLL WAY IN WHICH DON QUIXOTE HAD HIMSELF DUBBED A
KNIGHT
Harassed by this reflection, he made haste with his scanty pothouse supper, and
having finished it called the landlord, and shutting himself into the stable with him,
fell on his knees before him, saying, "From this spot I rise not, valiant knight, until
your courtesy grants me the boon I seek, one that will redound to your praise and the
benefit of the human race." The landlord, seeing his guest at his feet and hearing a
speech of this kind, stood staring at him in bewilderment, not knowing what to do or
say, and entreating him to rise, but all to no purpose until he had agreed to grant the
boon demanded of him. "I looked for no less, my lord, from your High
Magnificence," replied Don Quixote, "and I have to tell you that the boon I have
asked and your liberality has granted is that you shall dub me knight to-morrow
morning, and that to-night I shall watch my arms in the chapel of this your castle; thus
tomorrow, as I have said, will be accomplished what I so much desire, enabling me
lawfully to roam through all the four quarters of the world seeking adventures on
behalf of those in distress, as is the duty of chivalry and of knights-errant like myself,
whose ambition is directed to such deeds."
The landlord, who, as has been mentioned, was something of a wag, and had already
some suspicion of his guest's want of wits, was quite convinced of it on hearing talk of
this kind from him, and to make sport for the night he determined to fall in with his
humour. So he told him he was quite right in pursuing the object he had in view, and
that such a motive was natural and becoming in cavaliers as distinguished as he
seemed and his gallant bearing showed him to be; and that he himself in his younger
days had followed the same honourable calling, roaming in quest of adventures in
various parts of the world, among others the Curing-grounds of Malaga, the Isles of
Riaran, the Precinct of Seville, the Little Market of Segovia, the Olivera of Valencia,
the Rondilla of Granada, the Strand of San Lucar, the Colt of Cordova, the Taverns of
Toledo, and divers other quarters, where he had proved the nimbleness of his feet and
the lightness of his fingers, doing many wrongs, cheating many widows, ruining
maids and swindling minors, and, in short, bringing himself under the notice of almost
every tribunal and court of justice in Spain; until at last he had retired to this castle of
his, where he was living upon his property and upon that of others; and where he
received all knights-errant of whatever rank or condition they might be, all for the
great love he bore them and that they might share their substance with him in return
for his benevolence. He told him, moreover, that in this castle of his there was no
chapel in which he could watch his armour, as it had been pulled down in order to be
rebuilt, but that in a case of necessity it might, he knew, be watched anywhere, and he
might watch it that night in a courtyard of the castle, and in the morning, God willing,
the requisite ceremonies might be performed so as to have him dubbed a knight, and
so thoroughly dubbed that nobody could be more so. He asked if he had any money
with him, to which Don Quixote replied that he had not a farthing, as in the histories
of knights-errant he had never read of any of them carrying any. On this point the
landlord told him he was mistaken; for, though not recorded in the histories, because
in the author's opinion there was no need to mention anything so obvious and
necessary as money and clean shirts, it was not to be supposed therefore that they did
not carry them, and he might regard it as certain and established that all knights-errant
(about whom there were so many full and unimpeachable books) carried wellfurnished purses in case of emergency, and likewise carried shirts and a little box of
ointment to cure the wounds they received. For in those plains and deserts where they
engaged in combat and came out wounded, it was not always that there was some one
to cure them, unless indeed they had for a friend some sage magician to succour them
at once by fetching through the air upon a cloud some damsel or dwarf with a vial of
water of such virtue that by tasting one drop of it they were cured of their hurts and
wounds in an instant and left as sound as if they had not received any damage
whatever. But in case this should not occur, the knights of old took care to see that
their squires were provided with money and other requisites, such as lint and
ointments for healing purposes; and when it happened that knights had no squires
(which was rarely and seldom the case) they themselves carried everything in cunning
saddle-bags that were hardly seen on the horse's croup, as if it were something else of
more importance, because, unless for some such reason, carrying saddle-bags was not
very favourably regarded among knights-errant. He therefore advised him (and, as his
godson so soon to be, he might even command him) never from that time forth to
travel without money and the usual requirements, and he would find the advantage of
them when he least expected it.
Don Quixote promised to follow his advice scrupulously, and it was arranged
forthwith that he should watch his armour in a large yard at one side of the inn; so,
collecting it all together, Don Quixote placed it on a trough that stood by the side of a
well, and bracing his buckler on his arm he grasped his lance and began with a stately
air to march up and down in front of the trough, and as he began his march night
began to fall.
The landlord told all the people who were in the inn about the craze of his guest, the
watching of the armour, and the dubbing ceremony he contemplated. Full of wonder
at so strange a form of madness, they flocked to see it from a distance, and observed
with what composure he sometimes paced up and down, or sometimes, leaning on his
lance, gazed on his armour without taking his eyes off it for ever so long; and as the
night closed in with a light from the moon so brilliant that it might vie with his that
lent it, everything the novice knight did was plainly seen by all.
Meanwhile one of the carriers who were in the inn thought fit to water his team, and it
was necessary to remove Don Quixote's armour as it lay on the trough; but he seeing
the other approach hailed him in a loud voice, "O thou, whoever thou art, rash knight
that comest to lay hands on the armour of the most valorous errant that ever girt on
sword, have a care what thou dost; touch it not unless thou wouldst lay down thy life
as the penalty of thy rashness." The carrier gave no heed to these words (and he would
have done better to heed them if he had been heedful of his health), but seizing it by
the straps flung the armour some distance from him. Seeing this, Don Quixote raised
his eyes to heaven, and fixing his thoughts, apparently, upon his lady Dulcinea,
exclaimed, "Aid me, lady mine, in this the first encounter that presents itself to this
breast which thou holdest in subjection; let not thy favour and protection fail me in
this first jeopardy;" and, with these words and others to the same purpose, dropping
his buckler he lifted his lance with both hands and with it smote such a blow on the
carrier's head that he stretched him on the ground, so stunned that had he followed it
up with a second there would have been no need of a surgeon to cure him. This done,
he picked up his armour and returned to his beat with the same serenity as before.
Shortly after this, another, not knowing what had happened (for the carrier still lay
senseless), came with the same object of giving water to his mules, and was
proceeding to remove the armour in order to clear the trough, when Don Quixote,
without uttering a word or imploring aid from anyone, once more dropped his buckler
and once more lifted his lance, and without actually breaking the second carrier's head
into pieces, made more than three of it, for he laid it open in four. At the noise all the
people of the inn ran to the spot, and among them the landlord. Seeing this, Don
Quixote braced his buckler on his arm, and with his hand on his sword exclaimed, "O
Lady of Beauty, strength and support of my faint heart, it is time for thee to turn the
eyes of thy greatness on this thy captive knight on the brink of so mighty an
adventure." By this he felt himself so inspired that he would not have flinched if all
the carriers in the world had assailed him. The comrades of the wounded perceiving
the plight they were in began from a distance to shower stones on Don Quixote, who
screened himself as best he could with his buckler, not daring to quit the trough and
leave his armour unprotected. The landlord shouted to them to leave him alone, for he
had already told them that he was mad, and as a madman he would not be accountable
even if he killed them all. Still louder shouted Don Quixote, calling them knaves and
traitors, and the lord of the castle, who allowed knights-errant to be treated in this
fashion, a villain and a low-born knight whom, had he received the order of
knighthood, he would call to account for his treachery. "But of you," he cried, "base
and vile rabble, I make no account; fling, strike, come on, do all ye can against me, ye
shall see what the reward of your folly and insolence will be." This he uttered with so
much spirit and boldness that he filled his assailants with a terrible fear, and as much
for this reason as at the persuasion of the landlord they left off stoning him, and he
allowed them to carry off the wounded, and with the same calmness and composure as
before resumed the watch over his armour.
But these freaks of his guest were not much to the liking of the landlord, so he
determined to cut matters short and confer upon him at once the unlucky order of
knighthood before any further misadventure could occur; so, going up to him, he
apologised for the rudeness which, without his knowledge, had been offered to him by
these low people, who, however, had been well punished for their audacity. As he had
already told him, he said, there was no chapel in the castle, nor was it needed for what
remained to be done, for, as he understood the ceremonial of the order, the whole
point of being dubbed a knight lay in the accolade and in the slap on the shoulder, and
that could be administered in the middle of a field; and that he had now done all that
was needful as to watching the armour, for all requirements were satisfied by a watch
of two hours only, while he had been more than four about it. Don Quixote believed it
all, and told him he stood there ready to obey him, and to make an end of it with as
much despatch as possible; for, if he were again attacked, and felt himself to be
dubbed knight, he would not, he thought, leave a soul alive in the castle, except such
as out of respect he might spare at his bidding.
Thus warned and menaced, the castellan forthwith brought out a book in which he
used to enter the straw and barley he served out to the carriers, and, with a lad
carrying a candle-end, and the two damsels already mentioned, he returned to where
Don Quixote stood, and bade him kneel down. Then, reading from his account-book
as if he were repeating some devout prayer, in the middle of his delivery he raised his
hand and gave him a sturdy blow on the neck, and then, with his own sword, a smart
slap on the shoulder, all the while muttering between his teeth as if he was saying his
prayers. Having done this, he directed one of the ladies to gird on his sword, which
she did with great self-possession and gravity, and not a little was required to prevent
a burst of laughter at each stage of the ceremony; but what they had already seen of
the novice knight's prowess kept their laughter within bounds. On girding him with
the sword the worthy lady said to him, "May God make your worship a very fortunate
knight, and grant you success in battle." Don Quixote asked her name in order that he
might from that time forward know to whom he was beholden for the favour he had
received, as he meant to confer upon her some portion of the honour he acquired by
the might of his arm. She answered with great humility that she was called La Tolosa,
and that she was the daughter of a cobbler of Toledo who lived in the stalls of
Sanchobienaya, and that wherever she might be she would serve and esteem him as
her lord. Don Quixote said in reply that she would do him a favour if thenceforward
she assumed the "Don" and called herself Dona Tolosa. She promised she would, and
then the other buckled on his spur, and with her followed almost the same
conversation as with the lady of the sword. He asked her name, and she said it was La
Molinera, and that she was the daughter of a respectable miller of Antequera; and of
her likewise Don Quixote requested that she would adopt the "Don" and call herself
Dona Molinera, making offers to her further services and favours.
Having thus, with hot haste and speed, brought to a conclusion these never-till-nowseen ceremonies, Don Quixote was on thorns until he saw himself on horseback
sallying forth in quest of adventures; and saddling Rocinante at once he mounted, and
embracing his host, as he returned thanks for his kindness in knighting him, he
addressed him in language so extraordinary that it is impossible to convey an idea of it
or report it. The landlord, to get him out of the inn, replied with no less rhetoric
though with shorter words, and without calling upon him to pay the reckoning let him
go with a Godspeed.
CHAPTER IV.
OF WHAT HAPPENED TO OUR KNIGHT WHEN HE LEFT THE INN
Day was dawning when Don Quixote quitted the inn, so happy, so gay, so exhilarated
at finding himself now dubbed a knight, that his joy was like to burst his horse-girths.
However, recalling the advice of his host as to the requisites he ought to carry with
him, especially that referring to money and shirts, he determined to go home and
provide himself with all, and also with a squire, for he reckoned upon securing a farmlabourer, a neighbour of his, a poor man with a family, but very well qualified for the
office of squire to a knight. With this object he turned his horse's head towards his
village, and Rocinante, thus reminded of his old quarters, stepped out so briskly that
he hardly seemed to tread the earth.
He had not gone far, when out of a thicket on his right there seemed to come feeble
cries as of some one in distress, and the instant he heard them he exclaimed, "Thanks
be to heaven for the favour it accords me, that it so soon offers me an opportunity of
fulfilling the obligation I have undertaken, and gathering the fruit of my ambition.
These cries, no doubt, come from some man or woman in want of help, and needing
my aid and protection;" and wheeling, he turned Rocinante in the direction whence
the cries seemed to proceed. He had gone but a few paces into the wood, when he saw
a mare tied to an oak, and tied to another, and stripped from the waist upwards, a
youth of about fifteen years of age, from whom the cries came. Nor were they without
cause, for a lusty farmer was flogging him with a belt and following up every blow
with scoldings and commands, repeating, "Your mouth shut and your eyes open!"
while the youth made answer, "I won't do it again, master mine; by God's passion I
won't do it again, and I'll take more care of the flock another time."
Seeing what was going on, Don Quixote said in an angry voice, "Discourteous knight,
it ill becomes you to assail one who cannot defend himself; mount your steed and take
your lance" (for there was a lance leaning against the oak to which the mare was tied),
"and I will make you know that you are behaving as a coward." The farmer, seeing
before him this figure in full armour brandishing a lance over his head, gave himself
up for dead, and made answer meekly, "Sir Knight, this youth that I am chastising is
my servant, employed by me to watch a flock of sheep that I have hard by, and he is
so careless that I lose one every day, and when I punish him for his carelessness and
knavery he says I do it out of niggardliness, to escape paying him the wages I owe
him, and before God, and on my soul, he lies."
"Lies before me, base clown!" said Don Quixote. "By the sun that shines on us I have
a mind to run you through with this lance. Pay him at once without another word; if
not, by the God that rules us I will make an end of you, and annihilate you on the spot;
release him instantly."
The farmer hung his head, and without a word untied his servant, of whom
Don Quixote asked how much his master owed him.
He replied, nine months at seven reals a month. Don Quixote added it up, found that it
came to sixty-three reals, and told the farmer to pay it down immediately, if he did not
want to die for it.
The trembling clown replied that as he lived and by the oath he had sworn (though he
had not sworn any) it was not so much; for there were to be taken into account and
deducted three pairs of shoes he had given him, and a real for two blood-lettings when
he was sick.
"All that is very well," said Don Quixote; "but let the shoes and the blood-lettings
stand as a setoff against the blows you have given him without any cause; for if he
spoiled the leather of the shoes you paid for, you have damaged that of his body, and
if the barber took blood from him when he was sick, you have drawn it when he was
sound; so on that score he owes you nothing."
"The difficulty is, Sir Knight, that I have no money here; let Andres come home with
me, and I will pay him all, real by real."
"I go with him!" said the youth. "Nay, God forbid! No, senor, not for the world; for
once alone with me, he would ray me like a Saint Bartholomew."
"He will do nothing of the kind," said Don Quixote; "I have only to command, and he
will obey me; and as he has sworn to me by the order of knighthood which he has
received, I leave him free, and I guarantee the payment."
"Consider what you are saying, senor," said the youth; "this master of mine is not a
knight, nor has he received any order of knighthood; for he is Juan Haldudo the Rich,
of Quintanar."
"That matters little," replied Don Quixote; "there may be Haldudos knights; moreover,
everyone is the son of his works."
"That is true," said Andres; "but this master of mine—of what works is he the son,
when he refuses me the wages of my sweat and labour?"
"I do not refuse, brother Andres," said the farmer, "be good enough to come along
with me, and I swear by all the orders of knighthood there are in the world to pay you
as I have agreed, real by real, and perfumed."
"For the perfumery I excuse you," said Don Quixote; "give it to him in reals, and I
shall be satisfied; and see that you do as you have sworn; if not, by the same oath I
swear to come back and hunt you out and punish you; and I shall find you though you
should lie closer than a lizard. And if you desire to know who it is lays this command
upon you, that you be more firmly bound to obey it, know that I am the valorous Don
Quixote of La Mancha, the undoer of wrongs and injustices; and so, God be with you,
and keep in mind what you have promised and sworn under those penalties that have
been already declared to you."
So saying, he gave Rocinante the spur and was soon out of reach. The farmer
followed him with his eyes, and when he saw that he had cleared the wood and was no
longer in sight, he turned to his boy Andres, and said, "Come here, my son, I want to
pay you what I owe you, as that undoer of wrongs has commanded me."
"My oath on it," said Andres, "your worship will be well advised to obey the
command of that good knight—may he live a thousand years—for, as he is a valiant
and just judge, by Roque, if you do not pay me, he will come back and do as he said."
"My oath on it, too," said the farmer; "but as I have a strong affection for you, I want
to add to the debt in order to add to the payment;" and seizing him by the arm, he tied
him up again, and gave him such a flogging that he left him for dead.
"Now, Master Andres," said the farmer, "call on the undoer of wrongs; you will find
he won't undo that, though I am not sure that I have quite done with you, for I have a
good mind to flay you alive." But at last he untied him, and gave him leave to go look
for his judge in order to put the sentence pronounced into execution.
Andres went off rather down in the mouth, swearing he would go to look for the
valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha and tell him exactly what had happened, and that
all would have to be repaid him sevenfold; but for all that, he went off weeping, while
his master stood laughing.
Thus did the valiant Don Quixote right that wrong, and, thoroughly satisfied with
what had taken place, as he considered he had made a very happy and noble beginning
with his knighthood, he took the road towards his village in perfect self-content,
saying in a low voice, "Well mayest thou this day call thyself fortunate above all on
earth, O Dulcinea del Toboso, fairest of the fair! since it has fallen to thy lot to hold
subject and submissive to thy full will and pleasure a knight so renowned as is and
will be Don Quixote of La Mancha, who, as all the world knows, yesterday received
the order of knighthood, and hath to-day righted the greatest wrong and grievance that
ever injustice conceived and cruelty perpetrated: who hath to-day plucked the rod
from the hand of yonder ruthless oppressor so wantonly lashing that tender child."
He now came to a road branching in four directions, and immediately he was
reminded of those cross-roads where knights-errant used to stop to consider which
road they should take. In imitation of them he halted for a while, and after having
deeply considered it, he gave Rocinante his head, submitting his own will to that of
his hack, who followed out his first intention, which was to make straight for his own
stable. After he had gone about two miles Don Quixote perceived a large party of
people, who, as afterwards appeared, were some Toledo traders, on their way to buy
silk at Murcia. There were six of them coming along under their sunshades, with four
servants mounted, and three muleteers on foot. Scarcely had Don Quixote descried
them when the fancy possessed him that this must be some new adventure; and to help
him to imitate as far as he could those passages he had read of in his books, here
seemed to come one made on purpose, which he resolved to attempt. So with a lofty
bearing and determination he fixed himself firmly in his stirrups, got his lance ready,
brought his buckler before his breast, and planting himself in the middle of the road,
stood waiting the approach of these knights-errant, for such he now considered and
held them to be; and when they had come near enough to see and hear, he exclaimed
with a haughty gesture, "All the world stand, unless all the world confess that in all
the world there is no maiden fairer than the Empress of La Mancha, the peerless
Dulcinea del Toboso."
The traders halted at the sound of this language and the sight of the strange figure that
uttered it, and from both figure and language at once guessed the craze of their owner;
they wished, however, to learn quietly what was the object of this confession that was
demanded of them, and one of them, who was rather fond of a joke and was very
sharp-witted, said to him, "Sir Knight, we do not know who this good lady is that you
speak of; show her to us, for, if she be of such beauty as you suggest, with all our
hearts and without any pressure we will confess the truth that is on your part required
of us."
"If I were to show her to you," replied Don Quixote, "what merit would you have in
confessing a truth so manifest? The essential point is that without seeing her you must
believe, confess, affirm, swear, and defend it; else ye have to do with me in battle, illconditioned, arrogant rabble that ye are; and come ye on, one by one as the order of
knighthood requires, or all together as is the custom and vile usage of your breed, here
do I bide and await you relying on the justice of the cause I maintain."
"Sir Knight," replied the trader, "I entreat your worship in the name of this present
company of princes, that, to save us from charging our consciences with the
confession of a thing we have never seen or heard of, and one moreover so much to
the prejudice of the Empresses and Queens of the Alcarria and Estremadura, your
worship will be pleased to show us some portrait of this lady, though it be no bigger
than a grain of wheat; for by the thread one gets at the ball, and in this way we shall
be satisfied and easy, and you will be content and pleased; nay, I believe we are
already so far agreed with you that even though her portrait should show her blind of
one eye, and distilling vermilion and sulphur from the other, we would nevertheless,
to gratify your worship, say all in her favour that you desire."
"She distils nothing of the kind, vile rabble," said Don Quixote, burning with rage,
"nothing of the kind, I say, only ambergris and civet in cotton; nor is she one-eyed or
humpbacked, but straighter than a Guadarrama spindle: but ye must pay for the
blasphemy ye have uttered against beauty like that of my lady."
And so saying, he charged with levelled lance against the one who had spoken, with
such fury and fierceness that, if luck had not contrived that Rocinante should stumble
midway and come down, it would have gone hard with the rash trader. Down went
Rocinante, and over went his master, rolling along the ground for some distance; and
when he tried to rise he was unable, so encumbered was he with lance, buckler, spurs,
helmet, and the weight of his old armour; and all the while he was struggling to get up
he kept saying, "Fly not, cowards and caitiffs! stay, for not by my fault, but my
horse's, am I stretched here."
One of the muleteers in attendance, who could not have had much good nature in him,
hearing the poor prostrate man blustering in this style, was unable to refrain from
giving him an answer on his ribs; and coming up to him he seized his lance, and
having broken it in pieces, with one of them he began so to belabour our Don Quixote
that, notwithstanding and in spite of his armour, he milled him like a measure of
wheat. His masters called out not to lay on so hard and to leave him alone, but the
muleteers blood was up, and he did not care to drop the game until he had vented the
rest of his wrath, and gathering up the remaining fragments of the lance he finished
with a discharge upon the unhappy victim, who all through the storm of sticks that
rained on him never ceased threatening heaven, and earth, and the brigands, for such
they seemed to him. At last the muleteer was tired, and the traders continued their
journey, taking with them matter for talk about the poor fellow who had been
cudgelled. He when he found himself alone made another effort to rise; but if he was
unable when whole and sound, how was he to rise after having been thrashed and
well-nigh knocked to pieces? And yet he esteemed himself fortunate, as it seemed to
him that this was a regular knight-errant's mishap, and entirely, he considered, the
fault of his horse. However, battered in body as he was, to rise was beyond his power.
CHAPTER V.
IN WHICH THE NARRATIVE OF OUR KNIGHT'S MISHAP IS CONTINUED
Finding, then, that, in fact he could not move, he thought himself of having recourse
to his usual remedy, which was to think of some passage in his books, and his craze
brought to his mind that about Baldwin and the Marquis of Mantua, when Carloto left
him wounded on the mountain side, a story known by heart by the children, not
forgotten by the young men, and lauded and even believed by the old folk; and for all
that not a whit truer than the miracles of Mahomet. This seemed to him to fit exactly
the case in which he found himself, so, making a show of severe suffering, he began
to roll on the ground and with feeble breath repeat the very words which the wounded
knight of the wood is said to have uttered:
Where art thou, lady mine, that thou
 My sorrow dost not rue?
Thou canst not know it, lady mine,
 Or else thou art untrue.
And so he went on with the ballad as far as the lines:
O noble Marquis of Mantua,
 My Uncle and liege lord!
As chance would have it, when he had got to this line there happened to come by a
peasant from his own village, a neighbour of his, who had been with a load of wheat
to the mill, and he, seeing the man stretched there, came up to him and asked him who
he was and what was the matter with him that he complained so dolefully.
Don Quixote was firmly persuaded that this was the Marquis of Mantua, his uncle, so
the only answer he made was to go on with his ballad, in which he told the tale of his
misfortune, and of the loves of the Emperor's son and his wife all exactly as the ballad
sings it.
The peasant stood amazed at hearing such nonsense, and relieving him of the visor,
already battered to pieces by blows, he wiped his face, which was covered with dust,
and as soon as he had done so he recognised him and said, "Senor Quixada" (for so he
appears to have been called when he was in his senses and had not yet changed from a
quiet country gentleman into a knight-errant), "who has brought your worship to this
pass?" But to all questions the other only went on with his ballad.
Seeing this, the good man removed as well as he could his breastplate and backpiece
to see if he had any wound, but he could perceive no blood nor any mark whatever.
He then contrived to raise him from the ground, and with no little difficulty hoisted
him upon his ass, which seemed to him to be the easiest mount for him; and collecting
the arms, even to the splinters of the lance, he tied them on Rocinante, and leading
him by the bridle and the ass by the halter he took the road for the village, very sad to
hear what absurd stuff Don Quixote was talking.
Nor was Don Quixote less so, for what with blows and bruises he could not sit upright
on the ass, and from time to time he sent up sighs to heaven, so that once more he
drove the peasant to ask what ailed him. And it could have been only the devil himself
that put into his head tales to match his own adventures, for now, forgetting Baldwin,
he bethought himself of the Moor Abindarraez, when the Alcaide of Antequera,
Rodrigo de Narvaez, took him prisoner and carried him away to his castle; so that
when the peasant again asked him how he was and what ailed him, he gave him for
reply the same words and phrases that the captive Abindarraez gave to Rodrigo de
Narvaez, just as he had read the story in the "Diana" of Jorge de Montemayor where it
is written, applying it to his own case so aptly that the peasant went along cursing his
fate that he had to listen to such a lot of nonsense; from which, however, he came to
the conclusion that his neighbour was mad, and so made all haste to reach the village
to escape the wearisomeness of this harangue of Don Quixote's; who, at the end of it,
said, "Senor Don Rodrigo de Narvaez, your worship must know that this fair Xarifa I
have mentioned is now the lovely Dulcinea del Toboso, for whom I have done, am
doing, and will do the most famous deeds of chivalry that in this world have been
seen, are to be seen, or ever shall be seen."
To this the peasant answered, "Senor—sinner that I am!—cannot your
worship see that I am not Don Rodrigo de Narvaez nor the Marquis of
Mantua, but Pedro Alonso your neighbour, and that your worship is neither
Baldwin nor Abindarraez, but the worthy gentleman Senor Quixada?"
"I know who I am," replied Don Quixote, "and I know that I may be not only those I
have named, but all the Twelve Peers of France and even all the Nine Worthies, since
my achievements surpass all that they have done all together and each of them on his
own account."
With this talk and more of the same kind they reached the village just as night was
beginning to fall, but the peasant waited until it was a little later that the belaboured
gentleman might not be seen riding in such a miserable trim. When it was what
seemed to him the proper time he entered the village and went to Don Quixote's
house, which he found all in confusion, and there were the curate and the village
barber, who were great friends of Don Quixote, and his housekeeper was saying to
them in a loud voice, "What does your worship think can have befallen my master,
Senor Licentiate Pero Perez?" for so the curate was called; "it is three days now since
anything has been seen of him, or the hack, or the buckler, lance, or armour.
Miserable me! I am certain of it, and it is as true as that I was born to die, that these
accursed books of chivalry he has, and has got into the way of reading so constantly,
have upset his reason; for now I remember having often heard him saying to himself
that he would turn knight-errant and go all over the world in quest of adventures. To
the devil and Barabbas with such books, that have brought to ruin in this way the
finest understanding there was in all La Mancha!"
The niece said the same, and, more: "You must know, Master Nicholas"—for that was
the name of the barber—"it was often my uncle's way to stay two days and nights
together poring over these unholy books of misventures, after which he would fling
the book away and snatch up his sword and fall to slashing the walls; and when he
was tired out he would say he had killed four giants like four towers; and the sweat
that flowed from him when he was weary he said was the blood of the wounds he had
received in battle; and then he would drink a great jug of cold water and become calm
and quiet, saying that this water was a most precious potion which the sage Esquife, a
great magician and friend of his, had brought him. But I take all the blame upon
myself for never having told your worships of my uncle's vagaries, that you might put
a stop to them before things had come to this pass, and burn all these accursed
books—for he has a great number—that richly deserve to be burned like heretics."
"So say I too," said the curate, "and by my faith to-morrow shall not pass without
public judgment upon them, and may they be condemned to the flames lest they lead
those that read to behave as my good friend seems to have behaved."
All this the peasant heard, and from it he understood at last what was the matter with
his neighbour, so he began calling aloud, "Open, your worships, to Senor Baldwin and
to Senor the Marquis of Mantua, who comes badly wounded, and to Senor
Abindarraez, the Moor, whom the valiant Rodrigo de Narvaez, the Alcaide of
Antequera, brings captive."
At these words they all hurried out, and when they recognised their friend, master, and
uncle, who had not yet dismounted from the ass because he could not, they ran to
embrace him.
"Hold!" said he, "for I am badly wounded through my horse's fault; carry me to bed,
and if possible send for the wise Urganda to cure and see to my wounds."
"See there! plague on it!" cried the housekeeper at this: "did not my heart tell the truth
as to which foot my master went lame of? To bed with your worship at once, and we
will contrive to cure you here without fetching that Hurgada. A curse I say once more,
and a hundred times more, on those books of chivalry that have brought your worship
to such a pass."
They carried him to bed at once, and after searching for his wounds could find none,
but he said they were all bruises from having had a severe fall with his horse
Rocinante when in combat with ten giants, the biggest and the boldest to be found on
earth.
"So, so!" said the curate, "are there giants in the dance? By the sign of the Cross I will
burn them to-morrow before the day over."
They put a host of questions to Don Quixote, but his only answer to all was—give
him something to eat, and leave him to sleep, for that was what he needed most. They
did so, and the curate questioned the peasant at great length as to how he had found
Don Quixote. He told him, and the nonsense he had talked when found and on the
way home, all which made the licentiate the more eager to do what he did the next
day, which was to summon his friend the barber, Master Nicholas, and go with him to
Don Quixote's house.
CHAPTER VI.
OF THE DIVERTING AND IMPORTANT SCRUTINY WHICH THE CURATE AND THE BARBER
MADE IN THE LIBRARY OF OUR INGENIOUS GENTLEMAN
He was still sleeping; so the curate asked the niece for the keys of the room where the
books, the authors of all the mischief, were, and right willingly she gave them. They
all went in, the housekeeper with them, and found more than a hundred volumes of
big books very well bound, and some other small ones. The moment the housekeeper
saw them she turned about and ran out of the room, and came back immediately with
a saucer of holy water and a sprinkler, saying, "Here, your worship, senor licentiate,
sprinkle this room; don't leave any magician of the many there are in these books to
bewitch us in revenge for our design of banishing them from the world."
The simplicity of the housekeeper made the licentiate laugh, and he directed the
barber to give him the books one by one to see what they were about, as there might
be some to be found among them that did not deserve the penalty of fire.
"No," said the niece, "there is no reason for showing mercy to any of them; they have
every one of them done mischief; better fling them out of the window into the court
and make a pile of them and set fire to them; or else carry them into the yard, and
there a bonfire can be made without the smoke giving any annoyance." The
housekeeper said the same, so eager were they both for the slaughter of those
innocents, but the curate would not agree to it without first reading at any rate the
titles.
The first that Master Nicholas put into his hand was "The four books of Amadis of
Gaul." "This seems a mysterious thing," said the curate, "for, as I have heard say, this
was the first book of chivalry printed in Spain, and from this all the others derive their
birth and origin; so it seems to me that we ought inexorably to condemn it to the
flames as the founder of so vile a sect."
"Nay, sir," said the barber, "I too, have heard say that this is the best of all the books
of this kind that have been written, and so, as something singular in its line, it ought to
be pardoned."
"True," said the curate; "and for that reason let its life be spared for the present. Let us
see that other which is next to it."
"It is," said the barber, "the 'Sergas de Esplandian,' the lawful son of
Amadis of Gaul."
"Then verily," said the curate, "the merit of the father must not be put down to the
account of the son. Take it, mistress housekeeper; open the window and fling it into
the yard and lay the foundation of the pile for the bonfire we are to make."
The housekeeper obeyed with great satisfaction, and the worthy "Esplandian" went
flying into the yard to await with all patience the fire that was in store for him.
"Proceed," said the curate.
"This that comes next," said the barber, "is 'Amadis of Greece,' and, indeed, I believe
all those on this side are of the same Amadis lineage."
"Then to the yard with the whole of them," said the curate; "for to have the burning of
Queen Pintiquiniestra, and the shepherd Darinel and his eclogues, and the bedevilled
and involved discourses of his author, I would burn with them the father who begot
me if he were going about in the guise of a knight-errant."
"I am of the same mind," said the barber.
"And so am I," added the niece.
"In that case," said the housekeeper, "here, into the yard with them!"
They were handed to her, and as there were many of them, she spared herself the
staircase, and flung them down out of the window.
"Who is that tub there?" said the curate.
"This," said the barber, "is 'Don Olivante de Laura.'"
"The author of that book," said the curate, "was the same that wrote 'The Garden of
Flowers,' and truly there is no deciding which of the two books is the more truthful,
or, to put it better, the less lying; all I can say is, send this one into the yard for a
swaggering fool."
"This that follows is 'Florismarte of Hircania,'" said the barber.
"Senor Florismarte here?" said the curate; "then by my faith he must take up his
quarters in the yard, in spite of his marvellous birth and visionary adventures, for the
stiffness and dryness of his style deserve nothing else; into the yard with him and the
other, mistress housekeeper."
"With all my heart, senor," said she, and executed the order with great delight.
"This," said the barber, "is The Knight Platir.'"
"An old book that," said the curate, "but I find no reason for clemency in it; send it
after the others without appeal;" which was done.
Another book was opened, and they saw it was entitled, "The Knight of the
Cross."
"For the sake of the holy name this book has," said the curate, "its ignorance might be
excused; but then, they say, 'behind the cross there's the devil; to the fire with it."
Taking down another book, the barber said, "This is 'The Mirror of
Chivalry.'"
"I know his worship," said the curate; "that is where Senor Reinaldos of Montalvan
figures with his friends and comrades, greater thieves than Cacus, and the Twelve
Peers of France with the veracious historian Turpin; however, I am not for
condemning them to more than perpetual banishment, because, at any rate, they have
some share in the invention of the famous Matteo Boiardo, whence too the Christian
poet Ludovico Ariosto wove his web, to whom, if I find him here, and speaking any
language but his own, I shall show no respect whatever; but if he speaks his own
tongue I will put him upon my head."
"Well, I have him in Italian," said the barber, "but I do not understand him."
"Nor would it be well that you should understand him," said the curate, "and on that
score we might have excused the Captain if he had not brought him into Spain and
turned him into Castilian. He robbed him of a great deal of his natural force, and so do
all those who try to turn books written in verse into another language, for, with all the
pains they take and all the cleverness they show, they never can reach the level of the
originals as they were first produced. In short, I say that this book, and all that may be
found treating of those French affairs, should be thrown into or deposited in some dry
well, until after more consideration it is settled what is to be done with them;
excepting always one 'Bernardo del Carpio' that is going about, and another called
'Roncesvalles;' for these, if they come into my hands, shall pass at once into those of
the housekeeper, and from hers into the fire without any reprieve."
To all this the barber gave his assent, and looked upon it as right and proper, being
persuaded that the curate was so staunch to the Faith and loyal to the Truth that he
would not for the world say anything opposed to them. Opening another book he saw
it was "Palmerin de Oliva," and beside it was another called "Palmerin of England,"
seeing which the licentiate said, "Let the Olive be made firewood of at once and
burned until no ashes even are left; and let that Palm of England be kept and preserved
as a thing that stands alone, and let such another case be made for it as that which
Alexander found among the spoils of Darius and set aside for the safe keeping of the
works of the poet Homer. This book, gossip, is of authority for two reasons, first
because it is very good, and secondly because it is said to have been written by a wise
and witty king of Portugal. All the adventures at the Castle of Miraguarda are
excellent and of admirable contrivance, and the language is polished and clear,
studying and observing the style befitting the speaker with propriety and judgment. So
then, provided it seems good to you, Master Nicholas, I say let this and 'Amadis of
Gaul' be remitted the penalty of fire, and as for all the rest, let them perish without
further question or query."
"Nay, gossip," said the barber, "for this that I have here is the famous
'Don Belianis.'"
"Well," said the curate, "that and the second, third, and fourth parts all stand in need
of a little rhubarb to purge their excess of bile, and they must be cleared of all that
stuff about the Castle of Fame and other greater affectations, to which end let them be
allowed the over-seas term, and, according as they mend, so shall mercy or justice be
meted out to them; and in the mean time, gossip, do you keep them in your house and
let no one read them."
"With all my heart," said the barber; and not caring to tire himself with reading more
books of chivalry, he told the housekeeper to take all the big ones and throw them into
the yard. It was not said to one dull or deaf, but to one who enjoyed burning them
more than weaving the broadest and finest web that could be; and seizing about eight
at a time, she flung them out of the window.
In carrying so many together she let one fall at the feet of the barber, who took it up,
curious to know whose it was, and found it said, "History of the Famous Knight,
Tirante el Blanco."
"God bless me!" said the curate with a shout, "'Tirante el Blanco' here! Hand it over,
gossip, for in it I reckon I have found a treasury of enjoyment and a mine of
recreation. Here is Don Kyrieleison of Montalvan, a valiant knight, and his brother
Thomas of Montalvan, and the knight Fonseca, with the battle the bold Tirante fought
with the mastiff, and the witticisms of the damsel Placerdemivida, and the loves and
wiles of the widow Reposada, and the empress in love with the squire Hipolito—in
truth, gossip, by right of its style it is the best book in the world. Here knights eat and
sleep, and die in their beds, and make their wills before dying, and a great deal more
of which there is nothing in all the other books. Nevertheless, I say he who wrote it,
for deliberately composing such fooleries, deserves to be sent to the galleys for life.
Take it home with you and read it, and you will see that what I have said is true."
"As you will," said the barber; "but what are we to do with these little books that are
left?"
"These must be, not chivalry, but poetry," said the curate; and opening one he saw it
was the "Diana" of Jorge de Montemayor, and, supposing all the others to be of the
same sort, "these," he said, "do not deserve to be burned like the others, for they
neither do nor can do the mischief the books of chivalry have done, being books of
entertainment that can hurt no one."
"Ah, senor!" said the niece, "your worship had better order these to be burned as well
as the others; for it would be no wonder if, after being cured of his chivalry disorder,
my uncle, by reading these, took a fancy to turn shepherd and range the woods and
fields singing and piping; or, what would be still worse, to turn poet, which they say is
an incurable and infectious malady."
"The damsel is right," said the curate, "and it will be well to put this stumbling-block
and temptation out of our friend's way. To begin, then, with the 'Diana' of
Montemayor. I am of opinion it should not be burned, but that it should be cleared of
all that about the sage Felicia and the magic water, and of almost all the longer pieces
of verse: let it keep, and welcome, its prose and the honour of being the first of books
of the kind."
"This that comes next," said the barber, "is the 'Diana,' entitled the 'Second Part, by
the Salamancan,' and this other has the same title, and its author is Gil Polo."
"As for that of the Salamancan," replied the curate, "let it go to swell the number of
the condemned in the yard, and let Gil Polo's be preserved as if it came from Apollo
himself: but get on, gossip, and make haste, for it is growing late."
"This book," said the barber, opening another, "is the ten books of the
'Fortune of Love,' written by Antonio de Lofraso, a Sardinian poet."
"By the orders I have received," said the curate, "since Apollo has been Apollo, and
the Muses have been Muses, and poets have been poets, so droll and absurd a book as
this has never been written, and in its way it is the best and the most singular of all of
this species that have as yet appeared, and he who has not read it may be sure he has
never read what is delightful. Give it here, gossip, for I make more account of having
found it than if they had given me a cassock of Florence stuff."
He put it aside with extreme satisfaction, and the barber went on, "These that come
next are 'The Shepherd of Iberia,' 'Nymphs of Henares,' and 'The Enlightenment of
Jealousy.'"
"Then all we have to do," said the curate, "is to hand them over to the secular arm of
the housekeeper, and ask me not why, or we shall never have done."
"This next is the 'Pastor de Filida.'"
"No Pastor that," said the curate, "but a highly polished courtier; let it be preserved as
a precious jewel."
"This large one here," said the barber, "is called 'The Treasury of various Poems.'"
"If there were not so many of them," said the curate, "they would be more relished:
this book must be weeded and cleansed of certain vulgarities which it has with its
excellences; let it be preserved because the author is a friend of mine, and out of
respect for other more heroic and loftier works that he has written."
"This," continued the barber, "is the 'Cancionero' of Lopez de
Maldonado."
"The author of that book, too," said the curate, "is a great friend of mine, and his
verses from his own mouth are the admiration of all who hear them, for such is the
sweetness of his voice that he enchants when he chants them: it gives rather too much
of its eclogues, but what is good was never yet plentiful: let it be kept with those that
have been set apart. But what book is that next it?"
"The 'Galatea' of Miguel de Cervantes," said the barber.
"That Cervantes has been for many years a great friend of mine, and to my knowledge
he has had more experience in reverses than in verses. His book has some good
invention in it, it presents us with something but brings nothing to a conclusion: we
must wait for the Second Part it promises: perhaps with amendment it may succeed in
winning the full measure of grace that is now denied it; and in the mean time do you,
senor gossip, keep it shut up in your own quarters."
"Very good," said the barber; "and here come three together, the
'Araucana' of Don Alonso de Ercilla, the 'Austriada' of Juan Rufo,
Justice of Cordova, and the 'Montserrate' of Christobal de Virues, the
Valencian poet."
"These three books," said the curate, "are the best that have been written in Castilian
in heroic verse, and they may compare with the most famous of Italy; let them be
preserved as the richest treasures of poetry that Spain possesses."
The curate was tired and would not look into any more books, and so he decided that,
"contents uncertified," all the rest should be burned; but just then the barber held open
one, called "The Tears of Angelica."
"I should have shed tears myself," said the curate when he heard the title, "had I
ordered that book to be burned, for its author was one of the famous poets of the
world, not to say of Spain, and was very happy in the translation of some of Ovid's
fables."
CHAPTER VII.
OF THE SECOND SALLY OF OUR WORTHY KNIGHT DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA
At this instant Don Quixote began shouting out, "Here, here, valiant knights! here is
need for you to put forth the might of your strong arms, for they of the Court are
gaining the mastery in the tourney!" Called away by this noise and outcry, they
proceeded no farther with the scrutiny of the remaining books, and so it is thought that
"The Carolea," "The Lion of Spain," and "The Deeds of the Emperor," written by Don
Luis de Avila, went to the fire unseen and unheard; for no doubt they were among
those that remained, and perhaps if the curate had seen them they would not have
undergone so severe a sentence.
When they reached Don Quixote he was already out of bed, and was still shouting and
raving, and slashing and cutting all round, as wide awake as if he had never slept.
They closed with him and by force got him back to bed, and when he had become a
little calm, addressing the curate, he said to him, "Of a truth, Senor Archbishop
Turpin, it is a great disgrace for us who call ourselves the Twelve Peers, so carelessly
to allow the knights of the Court to gain the victory in this tourney, we the adventurers
having carried off the honour on the three former days."
"Hush, gossip," said the curate; "please God, the luck may turn, and what is lost today may be won to-morrow; for the present let your worship have a care of your
health, for it seems to me that you are over-fatigued, if not badly wounded."
"Wounded no," said Don Quixote, "but bruised and battered no doubt, for that bastard
Don Roland has cudgelled me with the trunk of an oak tree, and all for envy, because
he sees that I alone rival him in his achievements. But I should not call myself
Reinaldos of Montalvan did he not pay me for it in spite of all his enchantments as
soon as I rise from this bed. For the present let them bring me something to eat, for
that, I feel, is what will be more to my purpose, and leave it to me to avenge myself."
They did as he wished; they gave him something to eat, and once more he fell asleep,
leaving them marvelling at his madness.
That night the housekeeper burned to ashes all the books that were in the yard and in
the whole house; and some must have been consumed that deserved preservation in
everlasting archives, but their fate and the laziness of the examiner did not permit it,
and so in them was verified the proverb that the innocent suffer for the guilty.
One of the remedies which the curate and the barber immediately applied to their
friend's disorder was to wall up and plaster the room where the books were, so that
when he got up he should not find them (possibly the cause being removed the effect
might cease), and they might say that a magician had carried them off, room and all;
and this was done with all despatch. Two days later Don Quixote got up, and the first
thing he did was to go and look at his books, and not finding the room where he had
left it, he wandered from side to side looking for it. He came to the place where the
door used to be, and tried it with his hands, and turned and twisted his eyes in every
direction without saying a word; but after a good while he asked his housekeeper
whereabouts was the room that held his books.
The housekeeper, who had been already well instructed in what she was to answer,
said, "What room or what nothing is it that your worship is looking for? There are
neither room nor books in this house now, for the devil himself has carried all away."
"It was not the devil," said the niece, "but a magician who came on a cloud one night
after the day your worship left this, and dismounting from a serpent that he rode he
entered the room, and what he did there I know not, but after a little while he made
off, flying through the roof, and left the house full of smoke; and when we went to see
what he had done we saw neither book nor room: but we remember very well, the
housekeeper and I, that on leaving, the old villain said in a loud voice that, for a
private grudge he owed the owner of the books and the room, he had done mischief in
that house that would be discovered by-and-by: he said too that his name was the Sage
Munaton."
"He must have said Friston," said Don Quixote.
"I don't know whether he called himself Friston or Friton," said the housekeeper, "I
only know that his name ended with 'ton.'"
"So it does," said Don Quixote, "and he is a sage magician, a great enemy of mine,
who has a spite against me because he knows by his arts and lore that in process of
time I am to engage in single combat with a knight whom he befriends and that I am
to conquer, and he will be unable to prevent it; and for this reason he endeavours to do
me all the ill turns that he can; but I promise him it will be hard for him to oppose or
avoid what is decreed by Heaven."
"Who doubts that?" said the niece; "but, uncle, who mixes you up in these quarrels?
Would it not be better to remain at peace in your own house instead of roaming the
world looking for better bread than ever came of wheat, never reflecting that many go
for wool and come back shorn?"
"Oh, niece of mine," replied Don Quixote, "how much astray art thou in thy
reckoning: ere they shear me I shall have plucked away and stripped off the beards of
all who dare to touch only the tip of a hair of mine."
The two were unwilling to make any further answer, as they saw that his anger was
kindling.
In short, then, he remained at home fifteen days very quietly without showing any
signs of a desire to take up with his former delusions, and during this time he held
lively discussions with his two gossips, the curate and the barber, on the point he
maintained, that knights-errant were what the world stood most in need of, and that in
him was to be accomplished the revival of knight-errantry. The curate sometimes
contradicted him, sometimes agreed with him, for if he had not observed this
precaution he would have been unable to bring him to reason.
Meanwhile Don Quixote worked upon a farm labourer, a neighbour of his, an honest
man (if indeed that title can be given to him who is poor), but with very little wit in
his pate. In a word, he so talked him over, and with such persuasions and promises,
that the poor clown made up his mind to sally forth with him and serve him as esquire.
Don Quixote, among other things, told him he ought to be ready to go with him
gladly, because any moment an adventure might occur that might win an island in the
twinkling of an eye and leave him governor of it. On these and the like promises
Sancho Panza (for so the labourer was called) left wife and children, and engaged
himself as esquire to his neighbour.
Don Quixote next set about getting some money; and selling one thing and pawning
another, and making a bad bargain in every case, he got together a fair sum. He
provided himself with a buckler, which he begged as a loan from a friend, and,
restoring his battered helmet as best he could, he warned his squire Sancho of the day
and hour he meant to set out, that he might provide himself with what he thought most
needful. Above all, he charged him to take alforjas with him. The other said he would,
and that he meant to take also a very good ass he had, as he was not much given to
going on foot. About the ass, Don Quixote hesitated a little, trying whether he could
call to mind any knight-errant taking with him an esquire mounted on ass-back, but no
instance occurred to his memory. For all that, however, he determined to take him,
intending to furnish him with a more honourable mount when a chance of it presented
itself, by appropriating the horse of the first discourteous knight he encountered.
Himself he provided with shirts and such other things as he could, according to the
advice the host had given him; all which being done, without taking leave, Sancho
Panza of his wife and children, or Don Quixote of his housekeeper and niece, they
sallied forth unseen by anybody from the village one night, and made such good way
in the course of it that by daylight they held themselves safe from discovery, even
should search be made for them.
Sancho rode on his ass like a patriarch, with his alforjas and bota, and longing to see
himself soon governor of the island his master had promised him. Don Quixote
decided upon taking the same route and road he had taken on his first journey, that
over the Campo de Montiel, which he travelled with less discomfort than on the last
occasion, for, as it was early morning and the rays of the sun fell on them obliquely,
the heat did not distress them.
And now said Sancho Panza to his master, "Your worship will take care, Senor
Knight-errant, not to forget about the island you have promised me, for be it ever so
big I'll be equal to governing it."
To which Don Quixote replied, "Thou must know, friend Sancho Panza, that it was a
practice very much in vogue with the knights-errant of old to make their squires
governors of the islands or kingdoms they won, and I am determined that there shall
be no failure on my part in so liberal a custom; on the contrary, I mean to improve
upon it, for they sometimes, and perhaps most frequently, waited until their squires
were old, and then when they had had enough of service and hard days and worse
nights, they gave them some title or other, of count, or at the most marquis, of some
valley or province more or less; but if thou livest and I live, it may well be that before
six days are over, I may have won some kingdom that has others dependent upon it,
which will be just the thing to enable thee to be crowned king of one of them. Nor
needst thou count this wonderful, for things and chances fall to the lot of such knights
in ways so unexampled and unexpected that I might easily give thee even more than I
promise thee."
"In that case," said Sancho Panza, "if I should become a king by one of those miracles
your worship speaks of, even Juana Gutierrez, my old woman, would come to be
queen and my children infantes."
"Well, who doubts it?" said Don Quixote.
"I doubt it," replied Sancho Panza, "because for my part I am persuaded that though
God should shower down kingdoms upon earth, not one of them would fit the head of
Mari Gutierrez. Let me tell you, senor, she is not worth two maravedis for a queen;
countess will fit her better, and that only with God's help."
"Leave it to God, Sancho," returned Don Quixote, "for he will give her what suits her
best; but do not undervalue thyself so much as to come to be content with anything
less than being governor of a province."
"I will not, senor," answered Sancho, "specially as I have a man of such quality for a
master in your worship, who will know how to give me all that will be suitable for me
and that I can bear."
CHAPTER VIII.
OF THE GOOD FORTUNE WHICH THE VALIANT DON QUIXOTE HAD IN THE TERRIBLE AND
UNDREAMT-OF ADVENTURE OF THE WINDMILLS, WITH OTHER OCCURRENCES WORTHY TO
BE FITLY RECORDED
At this point they came in sight of thirty forty windmills that there are on plain, and as
soon as Don Quixote saw them he said to his squire, "Fortune is arranging matters for
us better than we could have shaped our desires ourselves, for look there, friend
Sancho Panza, where thirty or more monstrous giants present themselves, all of whom
I mean to engage in battle and slay, and with whose spoils we shall begin to make our
fortunes; for this is righteous warfare, and it is God's good service to sweep so evil a
breed from off the face of the earth."
"What giants?" said Sancho Panza.
"Those thou seest there," answered his master, "with the long arms, and some have
them nearly two leagues long."
"Look, your worship," said Sancho; "what we see there are not giants but windmills,
and what seem to be their arms are the sails that turned by the wind make the
millstone go."
"It is easy to see," replied Don Quixote, "that thou art not used to this business of
adventures; those are giants; and if thou art afraid, away with thee out of this and
betake thyself to prayer while I engage them in fierce and unequal combat."
So saying, he gave the spur to his steed Rocinante, heedless of the cries his squire
Sancho sent after him, warning him that most certainly they were windmills and not
giants he was going to attack. He, however, was so positive they were giants that he
neither heard the cries of Sancho, nor perceived, near as he was, what they were, but
made at them shouting, "Fly not, cowards and vile beings, for a single knight attacks
you."
A slight breeze at this moment sprang up, and the great sails began to move, seeing
which Don Quixote exclaimed, "Though ye flourish more arms than the giant
Briareus, ye have to reckon with me."
So saying, and commending himself with all his heart to his lady Dulcinea, imploring
her to support him in such a peril, with lance in rest and covered by his buckler, he
charged at Rocinante's fullest gallop and fell upon the first mill that stood in front of
him; but as he drove his lance-point into the sail the wind whirled it round with such
force that it shivered the lance to pieces, sweeping with it horse and rider, who went
rolling over on the plain, in a sorry condition. Sancho hastened to his assistance as fast
as his ass could go, and when he came up found him unable to move, with such a
shock had Rocinante fallen with him.
"God bless me!" said Sancho, "did I not tell your worship to mind what you were
about, for they were only windmills? and no one could have made any mistake about
it but one who had something of the same kind in his head."
"Hush, friend Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "the fortunes of war more than any other
are liable to frequent fluctuations; and moreover I think, and it is the truth, that that
same sage Friston who carried off my study and books, has turned these giants into
mills in order to rob me of the glory of vanquishing them, such is the enmity he bears
me; but in the end his wicked arts will avail but little against my good sword."
"God order it as he may," said Sancho Panza, and helping him to rise got him up again
on Rocinante, whose shoulder was half out; and then, discussing the late adventure,
they followed the road to Puerto Lapice, for there, said Don Quixote, they could not
fail to find adventures in abundance and variety, as it was a great thoroughfare. For all
that, he was much grieved at the loss of his lance, and saying so to his squire, he
added, "I remember having read how a Spanish knight, Diego Perez de Vargas by
name, having broken his sword in battle, tore from an oak a ponderous bough or
branch, and with it did such things that day, and pounded so many Moors, that he got
the surname of Machuca, and he and his descendants from that day forth were called
Vargas y Machuca. I mention this because from the first oak I see I mean to rend such
another branch, large and stout like that, with which I am determined and resolved to
do such deeds that thou mayest deem thyself very fortunate in being found worthy to
come and see them, and be an eyewitness of things that will with difficulty be
believed."
"Be that as God will," said Sancho, "I believe it all as your worship says it; but
straighten yourself a little, for you seem all on one side, may be from the shaking of
the fall."
"That is the truth," said Don Quixote, "and if I make no complaint of the pain it is
because knights-errant are not permitted to complain of any wound, even though their
bowels be coming out through it."
"If so," said Sancho, "I have nothing to say; but God knows I would rather your
worship complained when anything ailed you. For my part, I confess I must complain
however small the ache may be; unless this rule about not complaining extends to the
squires of knights-errant also."
Don Quixote could not help laughing at his squire's simplicity, and he assured him he
might complain whenever and however he chose, just as he liked, for, so far, he had
never read of anything to the contrary in the order of knighthood.
Sancho bade him remember it was dinner-time, to which his master answered that he
wanted nothing himself just then, but that he might eat when he had a mind. With this
permission Sancho settled himself as comfortably as he could on his beast, and taking
out of the alforjas what he had stowed away in them, he jogged along behind his
master munching deliberately, and from time to time taking a pull at the bota with a
relish that the thirstiest tapster in Malaga might have envied; and while he went on in
this way, gulping down draught after draught, he never gave a thought to any of the
promises his master had made him, nor did he rate it as hardship but rather as
recreation going in quest of adventures, however dangerous they might be. Finally
they passed the night among some trees, from one of which Don Quixote plucked a
dry branch to serve him after a fashion as a lance, and fixed on it the head he had
removed from the broken one. All that night Don Quixote lay awake thinking of his
lady Dulcinea, in order to conform to what he had read in his books, how many a
night in the forests and deserts knights used to lie sleepless supported by the memory
of their mistresses. Not so did Sancho Panza spend it, for having his stomach full of
something stronger than chicory water he made but one sleep of it, and, if his master
had not called him, neither the rays of the sun beating on his face nor all the cheery
notes of the birds welcoming the approach of day would have had power to waken
him. On getting up he tried the bota and found it somewhat less full than the night
before, which grieved his heart because they did not seem to be on the way to remedy
the deficiency readily. Don Quixote did not care to break his fast, for, as has been
already said, he confined himself to savoury recollections for nourishment.
They returned to the road they had set out with, leading to Puerto Lapice, and at three
in the afternoon they came in sight of it. "Here, brother Sancho Panza," said Don
Quixote when he saw it, "we may plunge our hands up to the elbows in what they call
adventures; but observe, even shouldst thou see me in the greatest danger in the world,
thou must not put a hand to thy sword in my defence, unless indeed thou perceivest
that those who assail me are rabble or base folk; for in that case thou mayest very
properly aid me; but if they be knights it is on no account permitted or allowed thee
by the laws of knighthood to help me until thou hast been dubbed a knight."
"Most certainly, senor," replied Sancho, "your worship shall be fully obeyed in this
matter; all the more as of myself I am peaceful and no friend to mixing in strife and
quarrels: it is true that as regards the defence of my own person I shall not give much
heed to those laws, for laws human and divine allow each one to defend himself
against any assailant whatever."
"That I grant," said Don Quixote, "but in this matter of aiding me against knights thou
must put a restraint upon thy natural impetuosity."
"I will do so, I promise you," answered Sancho, "and will keep this precept as
carefully as Sunday."
While they were thus talking there appeared on the road two friars of the order of St.
Benedict, mounted on two dromedaries, for not less tall were the two mules they rode
on. They wore travelling spectacles and carried sunshades; and behind them came a
coach attended by four or five persons on horseback and two muleteers on foot. In the
coach there was, as afterwards appeared, a Biscay lady on her way to Seville, where
her husband was about to take passage for the Indies with an appointment of high
honour. The friars, though going the same road, were not in her company; but the
moment Don Quixote perceived them he said to his squire, "Either I am mistaken, or
this is going to be the most famous adventure that has ever been seen, for those black
bodies we see there must be, and doubtless are, magicians who are carrying off some
stolen princess in that coach, and with all my might I must undo this wrong."
"This will be worse than the windmills," said Sancho. "Look, senor; those are friars of
St. Benedict, and the coach plainly belongs to some travellers: I tell you to mind well
what you are about and don't let the devil mislead you."
"I have told thee already, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "that on the subject of
adventures thou knowest little. What I say is the truth, as thou shalt see presently."
So saying, he advanced and posted himself in the middle of the road along which the
friars were coming, and as soon as he thought they had come near enough to hear
what he said, he cried aloud, "Devilish and unnatural beings, release instantly the
highborn princesses whom you are carrying off by force in this coach, else prepare to
meet a speedy death as the just punishment of your evil deeds."
The friars drew rein and stood wondering at the appearance of Don Quixote as well as
at his words, to which they replied, "Senor Caballero, we are not devilish or unnatural,
but two brothers of St. Benedict following our road, nor do we know whether or not
there are any captive princesses coming in this coach."
"No soft words with me, for I know you, lying rabble," said Don Quixote, and without
waiting for a reply he spurred Rocinante and with levelled lance charged the first friar
with such fury and determination, that, if the friar had not flung himself off the mule,
he would have brought him to the ground against his will, and sore wounded, if not
killed outright. The second brother, seeing how his comrade was treated, drove his
heels into his castle of a mule and made off across the country faster than the wind.
Sancho Panza, when he saw the friar on the ground, dismounting briskly from his ass,
rushed towards him and began to strip off his gown. At that instant the friars
muleteers came up and asked what he was stripping him for. Sancho answered them
that this fell to him lawfully as spoil of the battle which his lord Don Quixote had
won. The muleteers, who had no idea of a joke and did not understand all this about
battles and spoils, seeing that Don Quixote was some distance off talking to the
travellers in the coach, fell upon Sancho, knocked him down, and leaving hardly a
hair in his beard, belaboured him with kicks and left him stretched breathless and
senseless on the ground; and without any more delay helped the friar to mount, who,
trembling, terrified, and pale, as soon as he found himself in the saddle, spurred after
his companion, who was standing at a distance looking on, watching the result of the
onslaught; then, not caring to wait for the end of the affair just begun, they pursued
their journey making more crosses than if they had the devil after them.
Don Quixote was, as has been said, speaking to the lady in the coach: "Your beauty,
lady mine," said he, "may now dispose of your person as may be most in accordance
with your pleasure, for the pride of your ravishers lies prostrate on the ground through
this strong arm of mine; and lest you should be pining to know the name of your
deliverer, know that I am called Don Quixote of La Mancha, knight-errant and
adventurer, and captive to the peerless and beautiful lady Dulcinea del Toboso: and in
return for the service you have received of me I ask no more than that you should
return to El Toboso, and on my behalf present yourself before that lady and tell her
what I have done to set you free."
One of the squires in attendance upon the coach, a Biscayan, was listening to all Don
Quixote was saying, and, perceiving that he would not allow the coach to go on, but
was saying it must return at once to El Toboso, he made at him, and seizing his lance
addressed him in bad Castilian and worse Biscayan after his fashion, "Begone,
caballero, and ill go with thee; by the God that made me, unless thou quittest coach,
slayest thee as art here a Biscayan."
Don Quixote understood him quite well, and answered him very quietly, "If thou wert
a knight, as thou art none, I should have already chastised thy folly and rashness,
miserable creature." To which the Biscayan returned, "I no gentleman!—I swear to
God thou liest as I am Christian: if thou droppest lance and drawest sword, soon shalt
thou see thou art carrying water to the cat: Biscayan on land, hidalgo at sea, hidalgo at
the devil, and look, if thou sayest otherwise thou liest."
"'"You will see presently," said Agrajes,'" replied Don Quixote; and throwing his
lance on the ground he drew his sword, braced his buckler on his arm, and attacked
the Biscayan, bent upon taking his life.
The Biscayan, when he saw him coming on, though he wished to dismount from his
mule, in which, being one of those sorry ones let out for hire, he had no confidence,
had no choice but to draw his sword; it was lucky for him, however, that he was near
the coach, from which he was able to snatch a cushion that served him for a shield;
and they went at one another as if they had been two mortal enemies. The others
strove to make peace between them, but could not, for the Biscayan declared in his
disjointed phrase that if they did not let him finish his battle he would kill his mistress
and everyone that strove to prevent him. The lady in the coach, amazed and terrified
at what she saw, ordered the coachman to draw aside a little, and set herself to watch
this severe struggle, in the course of which the Biscayan smote Don Quixote a mighty
stroke on the shoulder over the top of his buckler, which, given to one without
armour, would have cleft him to the waist. Don Quixote, feeling the weight of this
prodigious blow, cried aloud, saying, "O lady of my soul, Dulcinea, flower of beauty,
come to the aid of this your knight, who, in fulfilling his obligations to your beauty,
finds himself in this extreme peril." To say this, to lift his sword, to shelter himself
well behind his buckler, and to assail the Biscayan was the work of an instant,
determined as he was to venture all upon a single blow. The Biscayan, seeing him
come on in this way, was convinced of his courage by his spirited bearing, and
resolved to follow his example, so he waited for him keeping well under cover of his
cushion, being unable to execute any sort of manoeuvre with his mule, which, dead
tired and never meant for this kind of game, could not stir a step.
On, then, as aforesaid, came Don Quixote against the wary Biscayan, with uplifted
sword and a firm intention of splitting him in half, while on his side the Biscayan
waited for him sword in hand, and under the protection of his cushion; and all present
stood trembling, waiting in suspense the result of blows such as threatened to fall, and
the lady in the coach and the rest of her following were making a thousand vows and
offerings to all the images and shrines of Spain, that God might deliver her squire and
all of them from this great peril in which they found themselves. But it spoils all, that
at this point and crisis the author of the history leaves this battle impending, giving as
excuse that he could find nothing more written about these achievements of Don
Quixote than what has been already set forth. It is true the second author of this work
was unwilling to believe that a history so curious could have been allowed to fall
under the sentence of oblivion, or that the wits of La Mancha could have been so
undiscerning as not to preserve in their archives or registries some documents
referring to this famous knight; and this being his persuasion, he did not despair of
finding the conclusion of this pleasant history, which, heaven favouring him, he did
find in a way that shall be related in the Second Part.
CHAPTER IX.
IN WHICH IS CONCLUDED AND FINISHED THE TERRIFIC BATTLE BETWEEN THE GALLANT
BISCAYAN AND THE VALIANT MANCHEGAN
In the First Part of this history we left the valiant Biscayan and the renowned Don
Quixote with drawn swords uplifted, ready to deliver two such furious slashing blows
that if they had fallen full and fair they would at least have split and cleft them
asunder from top to toe and laid them open like a pomegranate; and at this so critical
point the delightful history came to a stop and stood cut short without any intimation
from the author where what was missing was to be found.
This distressed me greatly, because the pleasure derived from having read such a
small portion turned to vexation at the thought of the poor chance that presented itself
of finding the large part that, so it seemed to me, was missing of such an interesting
tale. It appeared to me to be a thing impossible and contrary to all precedent that so
good a knight should have been without some sage to undertake the task of writing his
marvellous achievements; a thing that was never wanting to any of those knightserrant who, they say, went after adventures; for every one of them had one or two
sages as if made on purpose, who not only recorded their deeds but described their
most trifling thoughts and follies, however secret they might be; and such a good
knight could not have been so unfortunate as not to have what Platir and others like
him had in abundance. And so I could not bring myself to believe that such a gallant
tale had been left maimed and mutilated, and I laid the blame on Time, the devourer
and destroyer of all things, that had either concealed or consumed it.
On the other hand, it struck me that, inasmuch as among his books there had been
found such modern ones as "The Enlightenment of Jealousy" and the "Nymphs and
Shepherds of Henares," his story must likewise be modern, and that though it might
not be written, it might exist in the memory of the people of his village and of those in
the neighbourhood. This reflection kept me perplexed and longing to know really and
truly the whole life and wondrous deeds of our famous Spaniard, Don Quixote of La
Mancha, light and mirror of Manchegan chivalry, and the first that in our age and in
these so evil days devoted himself to the labour and exercise of the arms of knighterrantry, righting wrongs, succouring widows, and protecting damsels of that sort that
used to ride about, whip in hand, on their palfreys, with all their virginity about them,
from mountain to mountain and valley to valley—for, if it were not for some ruffian,
or boor with a hood and hatchet, or monstrous giant, that forced them, there were in
days of yore damsels that at the end of eighty years, in all which time they had never
slept a day under a roof, went to their graves as much maids as the mothers that bore
them. I say, then, that in these and other respects our gallant Don Quixote is worthy of
everlasting and notable praise, nor should it be withheld even from me for the labour
and pains spent in searching for the conclusion of this delightful history; though I
know well that if Heaven, chance and good fortune had not helped me, the world
would have remained deprived of an entertainment and pleasure that for a couple of
hours or so may well occupy him who shall read it attentively. The discovery of it
occurred in this way.
One day, as I was in the Alcana of Toledo, a boy came up to sell some pamphlets and
old papers to a silk mercer, and, as I am fond of reading even the very scraps of paper
in the streets, led by this natural bent of mine I took up one of the pamphlets the boy
had for sale, and saw that it was in characters which I recognised as Arabic, and as I
was unable to read them though I could recognise them, I looked about to see if there
were any Spanish-speaking Morisco at hand to read them for me; nor was there any
great difficulty in finding such an interpreter, for even had I sought one for an older
and better language I should have found him. In short, chance provided me with one,
who when I told him what I wanted and put the book into his hands, opened it in the
middle and after reading a little in it began to laugh. I asked him what he was laughing
at, and he replied that it was at something the book had written in the margin by way
of a note. I bade him tell it to me; and he still laughing said, "In the margin, as I told
you, this is written: 'This Dulcinea del Toboso so often mentioned in this history, had,
they say, the best hand of any woman in all La Mancha for salting pigs.'"
When I heard Dulcinea del Toboso named, I was struck with surprise and amazement,
for it occurred to me at once that these pamphlets contained the history of Don
Quixote. With this idea I pressed him to read the beginning, and doing so, turning the
Arabic offhand into Castilian, he told me it meant, "History of Don Quixote of La
Mancha, written by Cide Hamete Benengeli, an Arab historian." It required great
caution to hide the joy I felt when the title of the book reached my ears, and snatching
it from the silk mercer, I bought all the papers and pamphlets from the boy for half a
real; and if he had had his wits about him and had known how eager I was for them,
he might have safely calculated on making more than six reals by the bargain. I
withdrew at once with the Morisco into the cloister of the cathedral, and begged him
to turn all these pamphlets that related to Don Quixote into the Castilian tongue,
without omitting or adding anything to them, offering him whatever payment he
pleased. He was satisfied with two arrobas of raisins and two bushels of wheat, and
promised to translate them faithfully and with all despatch; but to make the matter
easier, and not to let such a precious find out of my hands, I took him to my house,
where in little more than a month and a half he translated the whole just as it is set
down here.
In the first pamphlet the battle between Don Quixote and the Biscayan was drawn to
the very life, they planted in the same attitude as the history describes, their swords
raised, and the one protected by his buckler, the other by his cushion, and the
Biscayan's mule so true to nature that it could be seen to be a hired one a bowshot off.
The Biscayan had an inscription under his feet which said, "Don Sancho de Azpeitia,"
which no doubt must have been his name; and at the feet of Rocinante was another
that said, "Don Quixote." Rocinante was marvellously portrayed, so long and thin, so
lank and lean, with so much backbone and so far gone in consumption, that he showed
plainly with what judgment and propriety the name of Rocinante had been bestowed
upon him. Near him was Sancho Panza holding the halter of his ass, at whose feet was
another label that said, "Sancho Zancas," and according to the picture, he must have
had a big belly, a short body, and long shanks, for which reason, no doubt, the names
of Panza and Zancas were given him, for by these two surnames the history several
times calls him. Some other trifling particulars might be mentioned, but they are all of
slight importance and have nothing to do with the true relation of the history; and no
history can be bad so long as it is true.
If against the present one any objection be raised on the score of its truth, it can only
be that its author was an Arab, as lying is a very common propensity with those of that
nation; though, as they are such enemies of ours, it is conceivable that there were
omissions rather than additions made in the course of it. And this is my own opinion;
for, where he could and should give freedom to his pen in praise of so worthy a
knight, he seems to me deliberately to pass it over in silence; which is ill done and
worse contrived, for it is the business and duty of historians to be exact, truthful, and
wholly free from passion, and neither interest nor fear, hatred nor love, should make
them swerve from the path of truth, whose mother is history, rival of time, storehouse
of deeds, witness for the past, example and counsel for the present, and warning for
the future. In this I know will be found all that can be desired in the pleasantest, and if
it be wanting in any good quality, I maintain it is the fault of its hound of an author
and not the fault of the subject. To be brief, its Second Part, according to the
translation, began in this way:
With trenchant swords upraised and poised on high, it seemed as though the two
valiant and wrathful combatants stood threatening heaven, and earth, and hell, with
such resolution and determination did they bear themselves. The fiery Biscayan was
the first to strike a blow, which was delivered with such force and fury that had not
the sword turned in its course, that single stroke would have sufficed to put an end to
the bitter struggle and to all the adventures of our knight; but that good fortune which
reserved him for greater things, turned aside the sword of his adversary, so that
although it smote him upon the left shoulder, it did him no more harm than to strip all
that side of its armour, carrying away a great part of his helmet with half of his ear, all
which with fearful ruin fell to the ground, leaving him in a sorry plight.
Good God! Who is there that could properly describe the rage that filled the heart of
our Manchegan when he saw himself dealt with in this fashion? All that can be said is,
it was such that he again raised himself in his stirrups, and, grasping his sword more
firmly with both hands, he came down on the Biscayan with such fury, smiting him
full over the cushion and over the head, that—even so good a shield proving useless—
as if a mountain had fallen on him, he began to bleed from nose, mouth, and ears,
reeling as if about to fall backwards from his mule, as no doubt he would have done
had he not flung his arms about its neck; at the same time, however, he slipped his
feet out of the stirrups and then unclasped his arms, and the mule, taking fright at the
terrible blow, made off across the plain, and with a few plunges flung its master to the
ground. Don Quixote stood looking on very calmly, and, when he saw him fall, leaped
from his horse and with great briskness ran to him, and, presenting the point of his
sword to his eyes, bade him surrender, or he would cut his head off. The Biscayan was
so bewildered that he was unable to answer a word, and it would have gone hard with
him, so blind was Don Quixote, had not the ladies in the coach, who had hitherto been
watching the combat in great terror, hastened to where he stood and implored him
with earnest entreaties to grant them the great grace and favour of sparing their
squire's life; to which Don Quixote replied with much gravity and dignity, "In truth,
fair ladies, I am well content to do what ye ask of me; but it must be on one condition
and understanding, which is that this knight promise me to go to the village of El
Toboso, and on my behalf present himself before the peerless lady Dulcinea, that she
deal with him as shall be most pleasing to her."
The terrified and disconsolate ladies, without discussing Don Quixote's demand or
asking who Dulcinea might be, promised that their squire should do all that had been
commanded.
"Then, on the faith of that promise," said Don Quixote, "I shall do him no further
harm, though he well deserves it of me."
CHAPTER X.
OF THE PLEASANT DISCOURSE THAT PASSED BETWEEN DON QUIXOTE AND HIS SQUIRE
SANCHO PANZA
Now by this time Sancho had risen, rather the worse for the handling of the friars'
muleteers, and stood watching the battle of his master, Don Quixote, and praying to
God in his heart that it might be his will to grant him the victory, and that he might
thereby win some island to make him governor of, as he had promised. Seeing,
therefore, that the struggle was now over, and that his master was returning to mount
Rocinante, he approached to hold the stirrup for him, and, before he could mount, he
went on his knees before him, and taking his hand, kissed it saying, "May it please
your worship, Senor Don Quixote, to give me the government of that island which has
been won in this hard fight, for be it ever so big I feel myself in sufficient force to be
able to govern it as much and as well as anyone in the world who has ever governed
islands."
To which Don Quixote replied, "Thou must take notice, brother Sancho, that this
adventure and those like it are not adventures of islands, but of cross-roads, in which
nothing is got except a broken head or an ear the less: have patience, for adventures
will present themselves from which I may make you, not only a governor, but
something more."
Sancho gave him many thanks, and again kissing his hand and the skirt of his
hauberk, helped him to mount Rocinante, and mounting his ass himself, proceeded to
follow his master, who at a brisk pace, without taking leave, or saying anything
further to the ladies belonging to the coach, turned into a wood that was hard by.
Sancho followed him at his ass's best trot, but Rocinante stepped out so that, seeing
himself left behind, he was forced to call to his master to wait for him. Don Quixote
did so, reining in Rocinante until his weary squire came up, who on reaching him said,
"It seems to me, senor, it would be prudent in us to go and take refuge in some church,
for, seeing how mauled he with whom you fought has been left, it will be no wonder
if they give information of the affair to the Holy Brotherhood and arrest us, and, faith,
if they do, before we come out of gaol we shall have to sweat for it."
"Peace," said Don Quixote; "where hast thou ever seen or heard that a knight-errant
has been arraigned before a court of justice, however many homicides he may have
committed?"
"I know nothing about omecils," answered Sancho, "nor in my life have had anything
to do with one; I only know that the Holy Brotherhood looks after those who fight in
the fields, and in that other matter I do not meddle."
"Then thou needst have no uneasiness, my friend," said Don Quixote, "for I will
deliver thee out of the hands of the Chaldeans, much more out of those of the
Brotherhood. But tell me, as thou livest, hast thou seen a more valiant knight than I in
all the known world; hast thou read in history of any who has or had higher mettle in
attack, more spirit in maintaining it, more dexterity in wounding or skill in
overthrowing?"
"The truth is," answered Sancho, "that I have never read any history, for I can neither
read nor write, but what I will venture to bet is that a more daring master than your
worship I have never served in all the days of my life, and God grant that this daring
be not paid for where I have said; what I beg of your worship is to dress your wound,
for a great deal of blood flows from that ear, and I have here some lint and a little
white ointment in the alforjas."
"All that might be well dispensed with," said Don Quixote, "if I had remembered to
make a vial of the balsam of Fierabras, for time and medicine are saved by one single
drop."
"What vial and what balsam is that?" said Sancho Panza.
"It is a balsam," answered Don Quixote, "the receipt of which I have in my memory,
with which one need have no fear of death, or dread dying of any wound; and so when
I make it and give it to thee thou hast nothing to do when in some battle thou seest
they have cut me in half through the middle of the body—as is wont to happen
frequently,—but neatly and with great nicety, ere the blood congeal, to place that
portion of the body which shall have fallen to the ground upon the other half which
remains in the saddle, taking care to fit it on evenly and exactly. Then thou shalt give
me to drink but two drops of the balsam I have mentioned, and thou shalt see me
become sounder than an apple."
"If that be so," said Panza, "I renounce henceforth the government of the promised
island, and desire nothing more in payment of my many and faithful services than that
your worship give me the receipt of this supreme liquor, for I am persuaded it will be
worth more than two reals an ounce anywhere, and I want no more to pass the rest of
my life in ease and honour; but it remains to be told if it costs much to make it."
"With less than three reals, six quarts of it may be made," said Don
Quixote.
"Sinner that I am!" said Sancho, "then why does your worship put off making it and
teaching it to me?"
"Peace, friend," answered Don Quixote; "greater secrets I mean to teach thee and
greater favours to bestow upon thee; and for the present let us see to the dressing, for
my ear pains me more than I could wish."
Sancho took out some lint and ointment from the alforjas; but when Don Quixote
came to see his helmet shattered, he was like to lose his senses, and clapping his hand
upon his sword and raising his eyes to heaven, be said, "I swear by the Creator of all
things and the four Gospels in their fullest extent, to do as the great Marquis of
Mantua did when he swore to avenge the death of his nephew Baldwin (and that was
not to eat bread from a table-cloth, nor embrace his wife, and other points which,
though I cannot now call them to mind, I here grant as expressed) until I take
complete vengeance upon him who has committed such an offence against me."
Hearing this, Sancho said to him, "Your worship should bear in mind, Senor Don
Quixote, that if the knight has done what was commanded him in going to present
himself before my lady Dulcinea del Toboso, he will have done all that he was bound
to do, and does not deserve further punishment unless he commits some new offence."
"Thou hast said well and hit the point," answered Don Quixote; and so I recall the
oath in so far as relates to taking fresh vengeance on him, but I make and confirm it
anew to lead the life I have said until such time as I take by force from some knight
another helmet such as this and as good; and think not, Sancho, that I am raising
smoke with straw in doing so, for I have one to imitate in the matter, since the very
same thing to a hair happened in the case of Mambrino's helmet, which cost
Sacripante so dear."
"Senor," replied Sancho, "let your worship send all such oaths to the devil, for they
are very pernicious to salvation and prejudicial to the conscience; just tell me now, if
for several days to come we fall in with no man armed with a helmet, what are we to
do? Is the oath to be observed in spite of all the inconvenience and discomfort it will
be to sleep in your clothes, and not to sleep in a house, and a thousand other
mortifications contained in the oath of that old fool the Marquis of Mantua, which
your worship is now wanting to revive? Let your worship observe that there are no
men in armour travelling on any of these roads, nothing but carriers and carters, who
not only do not wear helmets, but perhaps never heard tell of them all their lives."
"Thou art wrong there," said Don Quixote, "for we shall not have been above two
hours among these cross-roads before we see more men in armour than came to
Albraca to win the fair Angelica."
"Enough," said Sancho; "so be it then, and God grant us success, and that the time for
winning that island which is costing me so dear may soon come, and then let me die."
"I have already told thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "not to give thyself any
uneasiness on that score; for if an island should fail, there is the kingdom of Denmark,
or of Sobradisa, which will fit thee as a ring fits the finger, and all the more that, being
on terra firma, thou wilt all the better enjoy thyself. But let us leave that to its own
time; see if thou hast anything for us to eat in those alforjas, because we must
presently go in quest of some castle where we may lodge to-night and make the
balsam I told thee of, for I swear to thee by God, this ear is giving me great pain."
"I have here an onion and a little cheese and a few scraps of bread," said Sancho, "but
they are not victuals fit for a valiant knight like your worship."
"How little thou knowest about it," answered Don Quixote; "I would have thee to
know, Sancho, that it is the glory of knights-errant to go without eating for a month,
and even when they do eat, that it should be of what comes first to hand; and this
would have been clear to thee hadst thou read as many histories as I have, for, though
they are very many, among them all I have found no mention made of knights-errant
eating, unless by accident or at some sumptuous banquets prepared for them, and the
rest of the time they passed in dalliance. And though it is plain they could not do
without eating and performing all the other natural functions, because, in fact, they
were men like ourselves, it is plain too that, wandering as they did the most part of
their lives through woods and wilds and without a cook, their most usual fare would
be rustic viands such as those thou now offer me; so that, friend Sancho, let not that
distress thee which pleases me, and do not seek to make a new world or pervert
knight-errantry."
"Pardon me, your worship," said Sancho, "for, as I cannot read or write, as I said just
now, I neither know nor comprehend the rules of the profession of chivalry:
henceforward I will stock the alforjas with every kind of dry fruit for your worship, as
you are a knight; and for myself, as I am not one, I will furnish them with poultry and
other things more substantial."
"I do not say, Sancho," replied Don Quixote, "that it is imperative on knights-errant
not to eat anything else but the fruits thou speakest of; only that their more usual diet
must be those, and certain herbs they found in the fields which they knew and I know
too."
"A good thing it is," answered Sancho, "to know those herbs, for to my thinking it will
be needful some day to put that knowledge into practice."
And here taking out what he said he had brought, the pair made their repast peaceably
and sociably. But anxious to find quarters for the night, they with all despatch made
an end of their poor dry fare, mounted at once, and made haste to reach some
habitation before night set in; but daylight and the hope of succeeding in their object
failed them close by the huts of some goatherds, so they determined to pass the night
there, and it was as much to Sancho's discontent not to have reached a house, as it was
to his master's satisfaction to sleep under the open heaven, for he fancied that each
time this happened to him he performed an act of ownership that helped to prove his
chivalry.
CHAPTER XLIX.
WHICH TREATS OF THE SHREWD CONVERSATION WHICH SANCHO PANZA HELD WITH HIS
MASTER DON QUIXOTE
"Aha, I have caught you," said Sancho; "this is what in my heart and soul I was
longing to know. Come now, senor, can you deny what is commonly said around us,
when a person is out of humour, 'I don't know what ails so-and-so, that he neither eats,
nor drinks, nor sleeps, nor gives a proper answer to any question; one would think he
was enchanted'? From which it is to be gathered that those who do not eat, or drink, or
sleep, or do any of the natural acts I am speaking of-that such persons are enchanted;
but not those that have the desire your worship has, and drink when drink is given
them, and eat when there is anything to eat, and answer every question that is asked
them."
"What thou sayest is true, Sancho," replied Don Quixote; "but I have already told thee
there are many sorts of enchantments, and it may be that in the course of time they
have been changed one for another, and that now it may be the way with enchanted
people to do all that I do, though they did not do so before; so it is vain to argue or
draw inferences against the usage of the time. I know and feel that I am enchanted,
and that is enough to ease my conscience; for it would weigh heavily on it if I thought
that I was not enchanted, and that in a faint-hearted and cowardly way I allowed
myself to lie in this cage, defrauding multitudes of the succour I might afford to those
in need and distress, who at this very moment may be in sore want of my aid and
protection."
"Still for all that," replied Sancho, "I say that, for your greater and fuller satisfaction,
it would be well if your worship were to try to get out of this prison (and I promise to
do all in my power to help, and even to take you out of it), and see if you could once
more mount your good Rocinante, who seems to be enchanted too, he is so
melancholy and dejected; and then we might try our chance in looking for adventures
again; and if we have no luck there will be time enough to go back to the cage; in
which, on the faith of a good and loyal squire, I promise to shut myself up along with
your worship, if so be you are so unfortunate, or I so stupid, as not to be able to carry
out my plan."
"I am content to do as thou sayest, brother Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and when
thou seest an opportunity for effecting my release I will obey thee absolutely; but thou
wilt see, Sancho, how mistaken thou art in thy conception of my misfortune."
The knight-errant and the ill-errant squire kept up their conversation till they reached
the place where the curate, the canon, and the barber, who had already dismounted,
were waiting for them. The carter at once unyoked the oxen and left them to roam at
large about the pleasant green spot, the freshness of which seemed to invite, not
enchanted people like Don Quixote, but wide-awake, sensible folk like his squire,
who begged the curate to allow his master to leave the cage for a little; for if they did
not let him out, the prison might not be as clean as the propriety of such a gentleman
as his master required. The curate understood him, and said he would very gladly
comply with his request, only that he feared his master, finding himself at liberty,
would take to his old courses and make off where nobody could ever find him again.
"I will answer for his not running away," said Sancho.
"And I also," said the canon, "especially if he gives me his word as a knight not to
leave us without our consent."
Don Quixote, who was listening to all this, said, "I give it;-moreover one who is
enchanted as I am cannot do as he likes with himself; for he who had enchanted him
could prevent his moving from one place for three ages, and if he attempted to escape
would bring him back flying."—And that being so, they might as well release him,
particularly as it would be to the advantage of all; for, if they did not let him out, he
protested he would be unable to avoid offending their nostrils unless they kept their
distance.
The canon took his hand, tied together as they both were, and on his word and
promise they unbound him, and rejoiced beyond measure he was to find himself out
of the cage. The first thing he did was to stretch himself all over, and then he went to
where Rocinante was standing and giving him a couple of slaps on the haunches said,
"I still trust in God and in his blessed mother, O flower and mirror of steeds, that we
shall soon see ourselves, both of us, as we wish to be, thou with thy master on thy
back, and I mounted upon thee, following the calling for which God sent me into the
world." And so saying, accompanied by Sancho, he withdrew to a retired spot, from
which he came back much relieved and more eager than ever to put his squire's
scheme into execution.
The canon gazed at him, wondering at the extraordinary nature of his madness, and
that in all his remarks and replies he should show such excellent sense, and only lose
his stirrups, as has been already said, when the subject of chivalry was broached. And
so, moved by compassion, he said to him, as they all sat on the green grass awaiting
the arrival of the provisions:
"Is it possible, gentle sir, that the nauseous and idle reading of books of chivalry can
have had such an effect on your worship as to upset your reason so that you fancy
yourself enchanted, and the like, all as far from the truth as falsehood itself is? How
can there be any human understanding that can persuade itself there ever was all that
infinity of Amadises in the world, or all that multitude of famous knights, all those
emperors of Trebizond, all those Felixmartes of Hircania, all those palfreys, and
damsels-errant, and serpents, and monsters, and giants, and marvellous adventures,
and enchantments of every kind, and battles, and prodigious encounters, splendid
costumes, love-sick princesses, squires made counts, droll dwarfs, love letters, billings
and cooings, swashbuckler women, and, in a word, all that nonsense the books of
chivalry contain? For myself, I can only say that when I read them, so long as I do not
stop to think that they are all lies and frivolity, they give me a certain amount of
pleasure; but when I come to consider what they are, I fling the very best of them at
the wall, and would fling it into the fire if there were one at hand, as richly deserving
such punishment as cheats and impostors out of the range of ordinary toleration, and
as founders of new sects and modes of life, and teachers that lead the ignorant public
to believe and accept as truth all the folly they contain. And such is their audacity,
they even dare to unsettle the wits of gentlemen of birth and intelligence, as is shown
plainly by the way they have served your worship, when they have brought you to
such a pass that you have to be shut up in a cage and carried on an ox-cart as one
would carry a lion or a tiger from place to place to make money by showing it. Come,
Senor Don Quixote, have some compassion for yourself, return to the bosom of
common sense, and make use of the liberal share of it that heaven has been pleased to
bestow upon you, employing your abundant gifts of mind in some other reading that
may serve to benefit your conscience and add to your honour. And if, still led away by
your natural bent, you desire to read books of achievements and of chivalry, read the
Book of Judges in the Holy Scriptures, for there you will find grand reality, and deeds
as true as they are heroic. Lusitania had a Viriatus, Rome a Caesar, Carthage a
Hannibal, Greece an Alexander, Castile a Count Fernan Gonzalez, Valencia a Cid,
Andalusia a Gonzalo Fernandez, Estremadura a Diego Garcia de Paredes, Jerez a
Garci Perez de Vargas, Toledo a Garcilaso, Seville a Don Manuel de Leon, to read of
whose valiant deeds will entertain and instruct the loftiest minds and fill them with
delight and wonder. Here, Senor Don Quixote, will be reading worthy of your sound
understanding; from which you will rise learned in history, in love with virtue,
strengthened in goodness, improved in manners, brave without rashness, prudent
without cowardice; and all to the honour of God, your own advantage and the glory of
La Mancha, whence, I am informed, your worship derives your birth."
Don Quixote listened with the greatest attention to the canon's words, and when he
found he had finished, after regarding him for some time, he replied to him:
"It appears to me, gentle sir, that your worship's discourse is intended to persuade me
that there never were any knights-errant in the world, and that all the books of
chivalry are false, lying, mischievous and useless to the State, and that I have done
wrong in reading them, and worse in believing them, and still worse in imitating them,
when I undertook to follow the arduous calling of knight-errantry which they set
forth; for you deny that there ever were Amadises of Gaul or of Greece, or any other
of the knights of whom the books are full."
"It is all exactly as you state it," said the canon; to which Don Quixote returned, "You
also went on to say that books of this kind had done me much harm, inasmuch as they
had upset my senses, and shut me up in a cage, and that it would be better for me to
reform and change my studies, and read other truer books which would afford more
pleasure and instruction."
"Just so," said the canon.
"Well then," returned Don Quixote, "to my mind it is you who are the one that is out
of his wits and enchanted, as you have ventured to utter such blasphemies against a
thing so universally acknowledged and accepted as true that whoever denies it, as you
do, deserves the same punishment which you say you inflict on the books that irritate
you when you read them. For to try to persuade anybody that Amadis, and all the
other knights-adventurers with whom the books are filled, never existed, would be
like trying to persuade him that the sun does not yield light, or ice cold, or earth
nourishment. What wit in the world can persuade another that the story of the Princess
Floripes and Guy of Burgundy is not true, or that of Fierabras and the bridge of
Mantible, which happened in the time of Charlemagne? For by all that is good it is as
true as that it is daylight now; and if it be a lie, it must be a lie too that there was a
Hector, or Achilles, or Trojan war, or Twelve Peers of France, or Arthur of England,
who still lives changed into a raven, and is unceasingly looked for in his kingdom.
One might just as well try to make out that the history of Guarino Mezquino, or of the
quest of the Holy Grail, is false, or that the loves of Tristram and the Queen Yseult are
apocryphal, as well as those of Guinevere and Lancelot, when there are persons who
can almost remember having seen the Dame Quintanona, who was the best cupbearer
in Great Britain. And so true is this, that I recollect a grandmother of mine on the
father's side, whenever she saw any dame in a venerable hood, used to say to me,
'Grandson, that one is like Dame Quintanona,' from which I conclude that she must
have known her, or at least had managed to see some portrait of her. Then who can
deny that the story of Pierres and the fair Magalona is true, when even to this day may
be seen in the king's armoury the pin with which the valiant Pierres guided the
wooden horse he rode through the air, and it is a trifle bigger than the pole of a cart?
And alongside of the pin is Babieca's saddle, and at Roncesvalles there is Roland's
horn, as large as a large beam; whence we may infer that there were Twelve Peers,
and a Pierres, and a Cid, and other knights like them, of the sort people commonly call
adventurers. Or perhaps I shall be told, too, that there was no such knight-errant as the
valiant Lusitanian Juan de Merlo, who went to Burgundy and in the city of Arras
fought with the famous lord of Charny, Mosen Pierres by name, and afterwards in the
city of Basle with Mosen Enrique de Remesten, coming out of both encounters
covered with fame and honour; or adventures and challenges achieved and delivered,
also in Burgundy, by the valiant Spaniards Pedro Barba and Gutierre Quixada (of
whose family I come in the direct male line), when they vanquished the sons of the
Count of San Polo. I shall be told, too, that Don Fernando de Guevara did not go in
quest of adventures to Germany, where he engaged in combat with Micer George, a
knight of the house of the Duke of Austria. I shall be told that the jousts of Suero de
Quinones, him of the 'Paso,' and the emprise of Mosen Luis de Falces against the
Castilian knight, Don Gonzalo de Guzman, were mere mockeries; as well as many
other achievements of Christian knights of these and foreign realms, which are so
authentic and true, that, I repeat, he who denies them must be totally wanting in
reason and good sense."
The canon was amazed to hear the medley of truth and fiction Don Quixote uttered,
and to see how well acquainted he was with everything relating or belonging to the
achievements of his knight-errantry; so he said in reply:
"I cannot deny, Senor Don Quixote, that there is some truth in what you say,
especially as regards the Spanish knights-errant; and I am willing to grant too that the
Twelve Peers of France existed, but I am not disposed to believe that they did all the
things that the Archbishop Turpin relates of them. For the truth of the matter is they
were knights chosen by the kings of France, and called 'Peers' because they were all
equal in worth, rank and prowess (at least if they were not they ought to have been),
and it was a kind of religious order like those of Santiago and Calatrava in the present
day, in which it is assumed that those who take it are valiant knights of distinction and
good birth; and just as we say now a Knight of St. John, or of Alcantara, they used to
say then a Knight of the Twelve Peers, because twelve equals were chosen for that
military order. That there was a Cid, as well as a Bernardo del Carpio, there can be no
doubt; but that they did the deeds people say they did, I hold to be very doubtful. In
that other matter of the pin of Count Pierres that you speak of, and say is near
Babieca's saddle in the Armoury, I confess my sin; for I am either so stupid or so
short-sighted, that, though I have seen the saddle, I have never been able to see the
pin, in spite of it being as big as your worship says it is."
"For all that it is there, without any manner of doubt," said Don Quixote; "and more
by token they say it is inclosed in a sheath of cowhide to keep it from rusting."
"All that may be," replied the canon; "but, by the orders I have received, I do not
remember seeing it. However, granting it is there, that is no reason why I am bound to
believe the stories of all those Amadises and of all that multitude of knights they tell
us about, nor is it reasonable that a man like your worship, so worthy, and with so
many good qualities, and endowed with such a good understanding, should allow
himself to be persuaded that such wild crazy things as are written in those absurd
books of chivalry are really true."
CHAPTER L.
OF THE SHREWD CONTROVERSY WHICH DON QUIXOTE AND THE CANON HELD, TOGETHER
WITH OTHER INCIDENTS
"A good joke, that!" returned Don Quixote. "Books that have been printed with the
king's licence, and with the approbation of those to whom they have been submitted,
and read with universal delight, and extolled by great and small, rich and poor,
learned and ignorant, gentle and simple, in a word by people of every sort, of
whatever rank or condition they may be—that these should be lies! And above all
when they carry such an appearance of truth with them; for they tell us the father,
mother, country, kindred, age, place, and the achievements, step by step, and day by
day, performed by such a knight or knights! Hush, sir; utter not such blasphemy; trust
me I am advising you now to act as a sensible man should; only read them, and you
will see the pleasure you will derive from them. For, come, tell me, can there be
anything more delightful than to see, as it were, here now displayed before us a vast
lake of bubbling pitch with a host of snakes and serpents and lizards, and ferocious
and terrible creatures of all sorts swimming about in it, while from the middle of the
lake there comes a plaintive voice saying: 'Knight, whosoever thou art who beholdest
this dread lake, if thou wouldst win the prize that lies hidden beneath these dusky
waves, prove the valour of thy stout heart and cast thyself into the midst of its dark
burning waters, else thou shalt not be worthy to see the mighty wonders contained in
the seven castles of the seven Fays that lie beneath this black expanse;' and then the
knight, almost ere the awful voice has ceased, without stopping to consider, without
pausing to reflect upon the danger to which he is exposing himself, without even
relieving himself of the weight of his massive armour, commending himself to God
and to his lady, plunges into the midst of the boiling lake, and when he little looks for
it, or knows what his fate is to be, he finds himself among flowery meadows, with
which the Elysian fields are not to be compared.
"The sky seems more transparent there, and the sun shines with a strange brilliancy,
and a delightful grove of green leafy trees presents itself to the eyes and charms the
sight with its verdure, while the ear is soothed by the sweet untutored melody of the
countless birds of gay plumage that flit to and fro among the interlacing branches.
Here he sees a brook whose limpid waters, like liquid crystal, ripple over fine sands
and white pebbles that look like sifted gold and purest pearls. There he perceives a
cunningly wrought fountain of many-coloured jasper and polished marble; here
another of rustic fashion where the little mussel-shells and the spiral white and yellow
mansions of the snail disposed in studious disorder, mingled with fragments of
glittering crystal and mock emeralds, make up a work of varied aspect, where art,
imitating nature, seems to have outdone it.
"Suddenly there is presented to his sight a strong castle or gorgeous palace with walls
of massy gold, turrets of diamond and gates of jacinth; in short, so marvellous is its
structure that though the materials of which it is built are nothing less than diamonds,
carbuncles, rubies, pearls, gold, and emeralds, the workmanship is still more rare. And
after having seen all this, what can be more charming than to see how a bevy of
damsels comes forth from the gate of the castle in gay and gorgeous attire, such that,
were I to set myself now to depict it as the histories describe it to us, I should never
have done; and then how she who seems to be the first among them all takes the bold
knight who plunged into the boiling lake by the hand, and without addressing a word
to him leads him into the rich palace or castle, and strips him as naked as when his
mother bore him, and bathes him in lukewarm water, and anoints him all over with
sweet-smelling unguents, and clothes him in a shirt of the softest sendal, all scented
and perfumed, while another damsel comes and throws over his shoulders a mantle
which is said to be worth at the very least a city, and even more? How charming it is,
then, when they tell us how, after all this, they lead him to another chamber where he
finds the tables set out in such style that he is filled with amazement and wonder; to
see how they pour out water for his hands distilled from amber and sweet-scented
flowers; how they seat him on an ivory chair; to see how the damsels wait on him all
in profound silence; how they bring him such a variety of dainties so temptingly
prepared that the appetite is at a loss which to select; to hear the music that resounds
while he is at table, by whom or whence produced he knows not. And then when the
repast is over and the tables removed, for the knight to recline in the chair, picking his
teeth perhaps as usual, and a damsel, much lovelier than any of the others, to enter
unexpectedly by the chamber door, and herself by his side, and begin to tell him what
the castle is, and how she is held enchanted there, and other things that amaze the
knight and astonish the readers who are perusing his history.
"But I will not expatiate any further upon this, as it may be gathered from it that
whatever part of whatever history of a knight-errant one reads, it will fill the reader,
whoever he be, with delight and wonder; and take my advice, sir, and, as I said before,
read these books and you will see how they will banish any melancholy you may feel
and raise your spirits should they be depressed. For myself I can say that since I have
been a knight-errant I have become valiant, polite, generous, well-bred,
magnanimous, courteous, dauntless, gentle, patient, and have learned to bear
hardships, imprisonments, and enchantments; and though it be such a short time since
I have seen myself shut up in a cage like a madman, I hope by the might of my arm, if
heaven aid me and fortune thwart me not, to see myself king of some kingdom where
I may be able to show the gratitude and generosity that dwell in my heart; for by my
faith, senor, the poor man is incapacitated from showing the virtue of generosity to
anyone, though he may possess it in the highest degree; and gratitude that consists of
disposition only is a dead thing, just as faith without works is dead. For this reason I
should be glad were fortune soon to offer me some opportunity of making myself an
emperor, so as to show my heart in doing good to my friends, particularly to this poor
Sancho Panza, my squire, who is the best fellow in the world; and I would gladly give
him a county I have promised him this ever so long, only that I am afraid he has not
the capacity to govern his realm."
Sancho partly heard these last words of his master, and said to him, "Strive hard you,
Senor Don Quixote, to give me that county so often promised by you and so long
looked for by me, for I promise you there will be no want of capacity in me to govern
it; and even if there is, I have heard say there are men in the world who farm
seigniories, paying so much a year, and they themselves taking charge of the
government, while the lord, with his legs stretched out, enjoys the revenue they pay
him, without troubling himself about anything else. That's what I'll do, and not stand
haggling over trifles, but wash my hands at once of the whole business, and enjoy my
rents like a duke, and let things go their own way."
"That, brother Sancho," said the canon, "only holds good as far as the enjoyment of
the revenue goes; but the lord of the seigniory must attend to the administration of
justice, and here capacity and sound judgment come in, and above all a firm
determination to find out the truth; for if this be wanting in the beginning, the middle
and the end will always go wrong; and God as commonly aids the honest intentions of
the simple as he frustrates the evil designs of the crafty."
"I don't understand those philosophies," returned Sancho Panza; "all I know is I would
I had the county as soon as I shall know how to govern it; for I have as much soul as
another, and as much body as anyone, and I shall be as much king of my realm as any
other of his; and being so I should do as I liked, and doing as I liked I should please
myself, and pleasing myself I should be content, and when one is content he has
nothing more to desire, and when one has nothing more to desire there is an end of it;
so let the county come, and God he with you, and let us see one another, as one blind
man said to the other."
"That is not bad philosophy thou art talking, Sancho," said the canon; "but for all that
there is a good deal to be said on this matter of counties."
To which Don Quixote returned, "I know not what more there is to be said; I only
guide myself by the example set me by the great Amadis of Gaul, when he made his
squire count of the Insula Firme; and so, without any scruples of conscience, I can
make a count of Sancho Panza, for he is one of the best squires that ever knight-errant
had."
The canon was astonished at the methodical nonsense (if nonsense be capable of
method) that Don Quixote uttered, at the way in which he had described the adventure
of the knight of the lake, at the impression that the deliberate lies of the books he read
had made upon him, and lastly he marvelled at the simplicity of Sancho, who desired
so eagerly to obtain the county his master had promised him.
By this time the canon's servants, who had gone to the inn to fetch the sumpter mule,
had returned, and making a carpet and the green grass of the meadow serve as a table,
they seated themselves in the shade of some trees and made their repast there, that the
carter might not be deprived of the advantage of the spot, as has been already said. As
they were eating they suddenly heard a loud noise and the sound of a bell that seemed
to come from among some brambles and thick bushes that were close by, and the
same instant they observed a beautiful goat, spotted all over black, white, and brown,
spring out of the thicket with a goatherd after it, calling to it and uttering the usual
cries to make it stop or turn back to the fold. The fugitive goat, scared and frightened,
ran towards the company as if seeking their protection and then stood still, and the
goatherd coming up seized it by the horns and began to talk to it as if it were
possessed of reason and understanding: "Ah wanderer, wanderer, Spotty, Spotty; how
have you gone limping all this time? What wolves have frightened you, my daughter?
Won't you tell me what is the matter, my beauty? But what else can it be except that
you are a she, and cannot keep quiet? A plague on your humours and the humours of
those you take after! Come back, come back, my darling; and if you will not be so
happy, at any rate you will be safe in the fold or with your companions; for if you who
ought to keep and lead them, go wandering astray, what will become of them?"
The goatherd's talk amused all who heard it, but especially the canon, who said to
him, "As you live, brother, take it easy, and be not in such a hurry to drive this goat
back to the fold; for, being a female, as you say, she will follow her natural instinct in
spite of all you can do to prevent it. Take this morsel and drink a sup, and that will
soothe your irritation, and in the meantime the goat will rest herself," and so saying,
he handed him the loins of a cold rabbit on a fork.
The goatherd took it with thanks, and drank and calmed himself, and then said, "I
should be sorry if your worships were to take me for a simpleton for having spoken so
seriously as I did to this animal; but the truth is there is a certain mystery in the words
I used. I am a clown, but not so much of one but that I know how to behave to men
and to beasts."
"That I can well believe," said the curate, "for I know already by experience that the
woods breed men of learning, and shepherds' harbour philosophers."
"At all events, senor," returned the goatherd, "they shelter men of experience; and that
you may see the truth of this and grasp it, though I may seem to put myself forward
without being asked, I will, if it will not tire you, gentlemen, and you will give me
your attention for a little, tell you a true story which will confirm this gentleman's
word (and he pointed to the curate) as well as my own."
To this Don Quixote replied, "Seeing that this affair has a certain colour of chivalry
about it, I for my part, brother, will hear you most gladly, and so will all these
gentlemen, from the high intelligence they possess and their love of curious novelties
that interest, charm, and entertain the mind, as I feel quite sure your story will do. So
begin, friend, for we are all prepared to listen."
"I draw my stakes," said Sancho, "and will retreat with this pasty to the brook there,
where I mean to victual myself for three days; for I have heard my lord, Don Quixote,
say that a knight-errant's squire should eat until he can hold no more, whenever he has
the chance, because it often happens them to get by accident into a wood so thick that
they cannot find a way out of it for six days; and if the man is not well filled or his
alforjas well stored, there he may stay, as very often he does, turned into a dried
mummy."
"Thou art in the right of it, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "go where thou wilt and eat all
thou canst, for I have had enough, and only want to give my mind its refreshment, as I
shall by listening to this good fellow's story."
"It is what we shall all do," said the canon; and then begged the goatherd to begin the
promised tale.
The goatherd gave the goat which he held by the horns a couple of slaps on the back,
saying, "Lie down here beside me, Spotty, for we have time enough to return to our
fold." The goat seemed to understand him, for as her master seated himself, she
stretched herself quietly beside him and looked up in his face to show him she was all
attention to what he was going to say, and then in these words he began his story.
CHAPTER LI.
WHICH DEALS WITH WHAT THE GOATHERD TOLD THOSE WHO WERE CARRYING OFF DON
QUIXOTE
Three leagues from this valley there is a village which, though small, is one of the
richest in all this neighbourhood, and in it there lived a farmer, a very worthy man,
and so much respected that, although to be so is the natural consequence of being rich,
he was even more respected for his virtue than for the wealth he had acquired. But
what made him still more fortunate, as he said himself, was having a daughter of such
exceeding beauty, rare intelligence, gracefulness, and virtue, that everyone who knew
her and beheld her marvelled at the extraordinary gifts with which heaven and nature
had endowed her. As a child she was beautiful, she continued to grow in beauty, and
at the age of sixteen she was most lovely. The fame of her beauty began to spread
abroad through all the villages around—but why do I say the villages around, merely,
when it spread to distant cities, and even made its way into the halls of royalty and
reached the ears of people of every class, who came from all sides to see her as if to
see something rare and curious, or some wonder-working image?
Her father watched over her and she watched over herself; for there are no locks, or
guards, or bolts that can protect a young girl better than her own modesty. The wealth
of the father and the beauty of the daughter led many neighbours as well as strangers
to seek her for a wife; but he, as one might well be who had the disposal of so rich a
jewel, was perplexed and unable to make up his mind to which of her countless suitors
he should entrust her. I was one among the many who felt a desire so natural, and, as
her father knew who I was, and I was of the same town, of pure blood, in the bloom of
life, and very rich in possessions, I had great hopes of success. There was another of
the same place and qualifications who also sought her, and this made her father's
choice hang in the balance, for he felt that on either of us his daughter would be well
bestowed; so to escape from this state of perplexity he resolved to refer the matter to
Leandra (for that is the name of the rich damsel who has reduced me to misery),
reflecting that as we were both equal it would be best to leave it to his dear daughter
to choose according to her inclination—a course that is worthy of imitation by all
fathers who wish to settle their children in life. I do not mean that they ought to leave
them to make a choice of what is contemptible and bad, but that they should place
before them what is good and then allow them to make a good choice as they please. I
do not know which Leandra chose; I only know her father put us both off with the
tender age of his daughter and vague words that neither bound him nor dismissed us.
My rival is called Anselmo and I myself Eugenio—that you may know the names of
the personages that figure in this tragedy, the end of which is still in suspense, though
it is plain to see it must be disastrous.
About this time there arrived in our town one Vicente de la Roca, the son of a poor
peasant of the same town, the said Vicente having returned from service as a soldier in
Italy and divers other parts. A captain who chanced to pass that way with his company
had carried him off from our village when he was a boy of about twelve years, and
now twelve years later the young man came back in a soldier's uniform, arrayed in a
thousand colours, and all over glass trinkets and fine steel chains. To-day he would
appear in one gay dress, to-morrow in another; but all flimsy and gaudy, of little
substance and less worth. The peasant folk, who are naturally malicious, and when
they have nothing to do can be malice itself, remarked all this, and took note of his
finery and jewellery, piece by piece, and discovered that he had three suits of different
colours, with garters and stockings to match; but he made so many arrangements and
combinations out of them, that if they had not counted them, anyone would have
sworn that he had made a display of more than ten suits of clothes and twenty plumes.
Do not look upon all this that I am telling you about the clothes as uncalled for or
spun out, for they have a great deal to do with the story. He used to seat himself on a
bench under the great poplar in our plaza, and there he would keep us all hanging
open-mouthed on the stories he told us of his exploits. There was no country on the
face of the globe he had not seen, nor battle he had not been engaged in; he had killed
more Moors than there are in Morocco and Tunis, and fought more single combats,
according to his own account, than Garcilaso, Diego Garcia de Paredes and a
thousand others he named, and out of all he had come victorious without losing a drop
of blood. On the other hand he showed marks of wounds, which, though they could
not be made out, he said were gunshot wounds received in divers encounters and
actions. Lastly, with monstrous impudence he used to say "you" to his equals and
even those who knew what he was, and declare that his arm was his father and his
deeds his pedigree, and that being a soldier he was as good as the king himself. And to
add to these swaggering ways he was a trifle of a musician, and played the guitar with
such a flourish that some said he made it speak; nor did his accomplishments end
here, for he was something of a poet too, and on every trifle that happened in the town
he made a ballad a league long.
This soldier, then, that I have described, this Vicente de la Roca, this bravo, gallant,
musician, poet, was often seen and watched by Leandra from a window of her house
which looked out on the plaza. The glitter of his showy attire took her fancy, his
ballads bewitched her (for he gave away twenty copies of every one he made), the
tales of his exploits which he told about himself came to her ears; and in short, as the
devil no doubt had arranged it, she fell in love with him before the presumption of
making love to her had suggested itself to him; and as in love-affairs none are more
easily brought to an issue than those which have the inclination of the lady for an ally,
Leandra and Vicente came to an understanding without any difficulty; and before any
of her numerous suitors had any suspicion of her design, she had already carried it
into effect, having left the house of her dearly beloved father (for mother she had
none), and disappeared from the village with the soldier, who came more triumphantly
out of this enterprise than out of any of the large number he laid claim to. All the
village and all who heard of it were amazed at the affair; I was aghast, Anselmo
thunderstruck, her father full of grief, her relations indignant, the authorities all in a
ferment, the officers of the Brotherhood in arms. They scoured the roads, they
searched the woods and all quarters, and at the end of three days they found the
flighty Leandra in a mountain cave, stript to her shift, and robbed of all the money and
precious jewels she had carried away from home with her.
They brought her back to her unhappy father, and questioned her as to her misfortune,
and she confessed without pressure that Vicente de la Roca had deceived her, and
under promise of marrying her had induced her to leave her father's house, as he
meant to take her to the richest and most delightful city in the whole world, which was
Naples; and that she, ill-advised and deluded, had believed him, and robbed her father,
and handed over all to him the night she disappeared; and that he had carried her away
to a rugged mountain and shut her up in the eave where they had found her. She said,
moreover, that the soldier, without robbing her of her honour, had taken from her
everything she had, and made off, leaving her in the cave, a thing that still further
surprised everybody. It was not easy for us to credit the young man's continence, but
she asserted it with such earnestness that it helped to console her distressed father,
who thought nothing of what had been taken since the jewel that once lost can never
be recovered had been left to his daughter. The same day that Leandra made her
appearance her father removed her from our sight and took her away to shut her up in
a convent in a town near this, in the hope that time may wear away some of the
disgrace she has incurred. Leandra's youth furnished an excuse for her fault, at least
with those to whom it was of no consequence whether she was good or bad; but those
who knew her shrewdness and intelligence did not attribute her misdemeanour to
ignorance but to wantonness and the natural disposition of women, which is for the
most part flighty and ill-regulated.
Leandra withdrawn from sight, Anselmo's eyes grew blind, or at any rate found
nothing to look at that gave them any pleasure, and mine were in darkness without a
ray of light to direct them to anything enjoyable while Leandra was away. Our
melancholy grew greater, our patience grew less; we cursed the soldier's finery and
railed at the carelessness of Leandra's father. At last Anselmo and I agreed to leave the
village and come to this valley; and, he feeding a great flock of sheep of his own, and
I a large herd of goats of mine, we pass our life among the trees, giving vent to our
sorrows, together singing the fair Leandra's praises, or upbraiding her, or else sighing
alone, and to heaven pouring forth our complaints in solitude. Following our example,
many more of Leandra's lovers have come to these rude mountains and adopted our
mode of life, and they are so numerous that one would fancy the place had been
turned into the pastoral Arcadia, so full is it of shepherds and sheep-folds; nor is there
a spot in it where the name of the fair Leandra is not heard. Here one curses her and
calls her capricious, fickle, and immodest, there another condemns her as frail and
frivolous; this pardons and absolves her, that spurns and reviles her; one extols her
beauty, another assails her character, and in short all abuse her, and all adore her, and
to such a pitch has this general infatuation gone that there are some who complain of
her scorn without ever having exchanged a word with her, and even some that bewail
and mourn the raging fever of jealousy, for which she never gave anyone cause, for,
as I have already said, her misconduct was known before her passion. There is no
nook among the rocks, no brookside, no shade beneath the trees that is not haunted by
some shepherd telling his woes to the breezes; wherever there is an echo it repeats the
name of Leandra; the mountains ring with "Leandra," "Leandra" murmur the brooks,
and Leandra keeps us all bewildered and bewitched, hoping without hope and fearing
without knowing what we fear. Of all this silly set the one that shows the least and
also the most sense is my rival Anselmo, for having so many other things to complain
of, he only complains of separation, and to the accompaniment of a rebeck, which he
plays admirably, he sings his complaints in verses that show his ingenuity. I follow
another, easier, and to my mind wiser course, and that is to rail at the frivolity of
women, at their inconstancy, their double dealing, their broken promises, their unkept
pledges, and in short the want of reflection they show in fixing their affections and
inclinations. This, sirs, was the reason of words and expressions I made use of to this
goat when I came up just now; for as she is a female I have a contempt for her, though
she is the best in all my fold. This is the story I promised to tell you, and if I have
been tedious in telling it, I will not be slow to serve you; my hut is close by, and I
have fresh milk and dainty cheese there, as well as a variety of toothsome fruit, no less
pleasing to the eye than to the palate.
CHAPTER LII.
OF THE QUARREL THAT DON QUIXOTE HAD WITH THE GOATHERD, TOGETHER WITH THE
RARE ADVENTURE OF THE PENITENTS, WHICH WITH AN EXPENDITURE OF SWEAT HE
BROUGHT TO A HAPPY CONCLUSION
The goatherd's tale gave great satisfaction to all the hearers, and the canon especially
enjoyed it, for he had remarked with particular attention the manner in which it had
been told, which was as unlike the manner of a clownish goatherd as it was like that of
a polished city wit; and he observed that the curate had been quite right in saying that
the woods bred men of learning. They all offered their services to Eugenio but he who
showed himself most liberal in this way was Don Quixote, who said to him, "Most
assuredly, brother goatherd, if I found myself in a position to attempt any adventure, I
would, this very instant, set out on your behalf, and would rescue Leandra from that
convent (where no doubt she is kept against her will), in spite of the abbess and all
who might try to prevent me, and would place her in your hands to deal with her
according to your will and pleasure, observing, however, the laws of chivalry which
lay down that no violence of any kind is to be offered to any damsel. But I trust in
God our Lord that the might of one malignant enchanter may not prove so great but
that the power of another better disposed may prove superior to it, and then I promise
you my support and assistance, as I am bound to do by my profession, which is none
other than to give aid to the weak and needy."
The goatherd eyed him, and noticing Don Quixote's sorry appearance and looks, he
was filled with wonder, and asked the barber, who was next him, "Senor, who is this
man who makes such a figure and talks in such a strain?"
"Who should it be," said the barber, "but the famous Don Quixote of La Mancha, the
undoer of injustice, the righter of wrongs, the protector of damsels, the terror of
giants, and the winner of battles?"
"That," said the goatherd, "sounds like what one reads in the books of the knightserrant, who did all that you say this man does; though it is my belief that either you
are joking, or else this gentleman has empty lodgings in his head."
"You are a great scoundrel," said Don Quixote, "and it is you who are empty and a
fool. I am fuller than ever was the whoreson bitch that bore you;" and passing from
words to deeds, he caught up a loaf that was near him and sent it full in the goatherd's
face, with such force that he flattened his nose; but the goatherd, who did not
understand jokes, and found himself roughly handled in such good earnest, paying no
respect to carpet, tablecloth, or diners, sprang upon Don Quixote, and seizing him by
the throat with both hands would no doubt have throttled him, had not Sancho Panza
that instant come to the rescue, and grasping him by the shoulders flung him down on
the table, smashing plates, breaking glasses, and upsetting and scattering everything
on it. Don Quixote, finding himself free, strove to get on top of the goatherd, who,
with his face covered with blood, and soundly kicked by Sancho, was on all fours
feeling about for one of the table-knives to take a bloody revenge with. The canon and
the curate, however, prevented him, but the barber so contrived it that he got Don
Quixote under him, and rained down upon him such a shower of fisticuffs that the
poor knight's face streamed with blood as freely as his own. The canon and the curate
were bursting with laughter, the officers were capering with delight, and both the one
and the other hissed them on as they do dogs that are worrying one another in a fight.
Sancho alone was frantic, for he could not free himself from the grasp of one of the
canon's servants, who kept him from going to his master's assistance.
At last, while they were all, with the exception of the two bruisers who were mauling
each other, in high glee and enjoyment, they heard a trumpet sound a note so doleful
that it made them all look in the direction whence the sound seemed to come. But the
one that was most excited by hearing it was Don Quixote, who though sorely against
his will he was under the goatherd, and something more than pretty well pummelled,
said to him, "Brother devil (for it is impossible but that thou must be one since thou
hast had might and strength enough to overcome mine), I ask thee to agree to a truce
for but one hour for the solemn note of yonder trumpet that falls on our ears seems to
me to summon me to some new adventure." The goatherd, who was by this time tired
of pummelling and being pummelled, released him at once, and Don Quixote rising to
his feet and turning his eyes to the quarter where the sound had been heard, suddenly
saw coming down the slope of a hill several men clad in white like penitents.
The fact was that the clouds had that year withheld their moisture from the earth, and
in all the villages of the district they were organising processions, rogations, and
penances, imploring God to open the hands of his mercy and send the rain; and to this
end the people of a village that was hard by were going in procession to a holy
hermitage there was on one side of that valley. Don Quixote when he saw the strange
garb of the penitents, without reflecting how often he had seen it before, took it into
his head that this was a case of adventure, and that it fell to him alone as a knighterrant to engage in it; and he was all the more confirmed in this notion, by the idea
that an image draped in black they had with them was some illustrious lady that these
villains and discourteous thieves were carrying off by force. As soon as this occurred
to him he ran with all speed to Rocinante who was grazing at large, and taking the
bridle and the buckler from the saddle-bow, he had him bridled in an instant, and
calling to Sancho for his sword he mounted Rocinante, braced his buckler on his arm,
and in a loud voice exclaimed to those who stood by, "Now, noble company, ye shall
see how important it is that there should be knights in the world professing the of
knight-errantry; now, I say, ye shall see, by the deliverance of that worthy lady who is
borne captive there, whether knights-errant deserve to be held in estimation," and so
saying he brought his legs to bear on Rocinante—for he had no spurs—and at a full
canter (for in all this veracious history we never read of Rocinante fairly galloping) set
off to encounter the penitents, though the curate, the canon, and the barber ran to
prevent him. But it was out of their power, nor did he even stop for the shouts of
Sancho calling after him, "Where are you going, Senor Don Quixote? What devils
have possessed you to set you on against our Catholic faith? Plague take me! mind,
that is a procession of penitents, and the lady they are carrying on that stand there is
the blessed image of the immaculate Virgin. Take care what you are doing, senor, for
this time it may be safely said you don't know what you are about." Sancho laboured
in vain, for his master was so bent on coming to quarters with these sheeted figures
and releasing the lady in black that he did not hear a word; and even had he heard, he
would not have turned back if the king had ordered him. He came up with the
procession and reined in Rocinante, who was already anxious enough to slacken speed
a little, and in a hoarse, excited voice he exclaimed, "You who hide your faces,
perhaps because you are not good subjects, pay attention and listen to what I am about
to say to you." The first to halt were those who were carrying the image, and one of
the four ecclesiastics who were chanting the Litany, struck by the strange figure of
Don Quixote, the leanness of Rocinante, and the other ludicrous peculiarities he
observed, said in reply to him, "Brother, if you have anything to say to us say it
quickly, for these brethren are whipping themselves, and we cannot stop, nor is it
reasonable we should stop to hear anything, unless indeed it is short enough to be said
in two words."
"I will say it in one," replied Don Quixote, "and it is this; that at once, this very
instant, ye release that fair lady whose tears and sad aspect show plainly that ye are
carrying her off against her will, and that ye have committed some scandalous outrage
against her; and I, who was born into the world to redress all such like wrongs, will
not permit you to advance another step until you have restored to her the liberty she
pines for and deserves."
From these words all the hearers concluded that he must be a madman, and began to
laugh heartily, and their laughter acted like gunpowder on Don Quixote's fury, for
drawing his sword without another word he made a rush at the stand. One of those
who supported it, leaving the burden to his comrades, advanced to meet him,
flourishing a forked stick that he had for propping up the stand when resting, and with
this he caught a mighty cut Don Quixote made at him that severed it in two; but with
the portion that remained in his hand he dealt such a thwack on the shoulder of Don
Quixote's sword arm (which the buckler could not protect against the clownish
assault) that poor Don Quixote came to the ground in a sad plight.
Sancho Panza, who was coming on close behind puffing and blowing, seeing him fall,
cried out to his assailant not to strike him again, for he was poor enchanted knight,
who had never harmed anyone all the days of his life; but what checked the clown
was, not Sancho's shouting, but seeing that Don Quixote did not stir hand or foot; and
so, fancying he had killed him, he hastily hitched up his tunic under his girdle and
took to his heels across the country like a deer.
By this time all Don Quixote's companions had come up to where he lay; but the
processionists seeing them come running, and with them the officers of the
Brotherhood with their crossbows, apprehended mischief, and clustering round the
image, raised their hoods, and grasped their scourges, as the priests did their tapers,
and awaited the attack, resolved to defend themselves and even to take the offensive
against their assailants if they could. Fortune, however, arranged the matter better than
they expected, for all Sancho did was to fling himself on his master's body, raising
over him the most doleful and laughable lamentation that ever was heard, for he
believed he was dead. The curate was known to another curate who walked in the
procession, and their recognition of one another set at rest the apprehensions of both
parties; the first then told the other in two words who Don Quixote was, and he and
the whole troop of penitents went to see if the poor gentleman was dead, and heard
Sancho Panza saying, with tears in his eyes, "Oh flower of chivalry, that with one
blow of a stick hast ended the course of thy well-spent life! Oh pride of thy race,
honour and glory of all La Mancha, nay, of all the world, that for want of thee will be
full of evil-doers, no longer in fear of punishment for their misdeeds! Oh thou,
generous above all the Alexanders, since for only eight months of service thou hast
given me the best island the sea girds or surrounds! Humble with the proud, haughty
with the humble, encounterer of dangers, endurer of outrages, enamoured without
reason, imitator of the good, scourge of the wicked, enemy of the mean, in short,
knight-errant, which is all that can be said!"
At the cries and moans of Sancho, Don Quixote came to himself, and the first word he
said was, "He who lives separated from you, sweetest Dulcinea, has greater miseries
to endure than these. Aid me, friend Sancho, to mount the enchanted cart, for I am not
in a condition to press the saddle of Rocinante, as this shoulder is all knocked to
pieces."
"That I will do with all my heart, senor," said Sancho; "and let us return to our village
with these gentlemen, who seek your good, and there we will prepare for making
another sally, which may turn out more profitable and creditable to us."
"Thou art right, Sancho," returned Don Quixote; "It will be wise to let the malign
influence of the stars which now prevails pass off."
The canon, the curate, and the barber told him he would act very wisely in doing as he
said; and so, highly amused at Sancho Panza's simplicities, they placed Don Quixote
in the cart as before. The procession once more formed itself in order and proceeded
on its road; the goatherd took his leave of the party; the officers of the Brotherhood
declined to go any farther, and the curate paid them what was due to them; the canon
begged the curate to let him know how Don Quixote did, whether he was cured of his
madness or still suffered from it, and then begged leave to continue his journey; in
short, they all separated and went their ways, leaving to themselves the curate and the
barber, Don Quixote, Sancho Panza, and the good Rocinante, who regarded
everything with as great resignation as his master. The carter yoked his oxen and
made Don Quixote comfortable on a truss of hay, and at his usual deliberate pace took
the road the curate directed, and at the end of six days they reached Don Quixote's
village, and entered it about the middle of the day, which it so happened was a
Sunday, and the people were all in the plaza, through which Don Quixote's cart
passed. They all flocked to see what was in the cart, and when they recognised their
townsman they were filled with amazement, and a boy ran off to bring the news to his
housekeeper and his niece that their master and uncle had come back all lean and
yellow and stretched on a truss of hay on an ox-cart. It was piteous to hear the cries
the two good ladies raised, how they beat their breasts and poured out fresh
maledictions on those accursed books of chivalry; all which was renewed when they
saw Don Quixote coming in at the gate.
At the news of Don Quixote's arrival Sancho Panza's wife came running, for she by
this time knew that her husband had gone away with him as his squire, and on seeing
Sancho, the first thing she asked him was if the ass was well. Sancho replied that he
was, better than his master was.
"Thanks be to God," said she, "for being so good to me; but now tell me, my friend,
what have you made by your squirings? What gown have you brought me back? What
shoes for your children?"
"I bring nothing of that sort, wife," said Sancho; "though I bring other things of more
consequence and value."
"I am very glad of that," returned his wife; "show me these things of more value and
consequence, my friend; for I want to see them to cheer my heart that has been so sad
and heavy all these ages that you have been away."
"I will show them to you at home, wife," said Sancho; "be content for the present; for
if it please God that we should again go on our travels in search of adventures, you
will soon see me a count, or governor of an island, and that not one of those everyday
ones, but the best that is to be had."
"Heaven grant it, husband," said she, "for indeed we have need of it. But tell me,
what's this about islands, for I don't understand it?"
"Honey is not for the mouth of the ass," returned Sancho; "all in good time thou shalt
see, wife—nay, thou wilt be surprised to hear thyself called 'your ladyship' by all thy
vassals."
"What are you talking about, Sancho, with your ladyships, islands, and vassals?"
returned Teresa Panza—for so Sancho's wife was called, though they were not
relations, for in La Mancha it is customary for wives to take their husbands' surnames.
"Don't be in such a hurry to know all this, Teresa," said Sancho; "it is enough that I
am telling you the truth, so shut your mouth. But I may tell you this much by the way,
that there is nothing in the world more delightful than to be a person of consideration,
squire to a knight-errant, and a seeker of adventures. To be sure most of those one
finds do not end as pleasantly as one could wish, for out of a hundred, ninety-nine will
turn out cross and contrary. I know it by experience, for out of some I came blanketed,
and out of others belaboured. Still, for all that, it is a fine thing to be on the look-out
for what may happen, crossing mountains, searching woods, climbing rocks, visiting
castles, putting up at inns, all at free quarters, and devil take the maravedi to pay."
While this conversation passed between Sancho Panza and his wife, Don Quixote's
housekeeper and niece took him in and undressed him and laid him in his old bed. He
eyed them askance, and could not make out where he was. The curate charged his
niece to be very careful to make her uncle comfortable and to keep a watch over him
lest he should make his escape from them again, telling her what they had been
obliged to do to bring him home. On this the pair once more lifted up their voices and
renewed their maledictions upon the books of chivalry, and implored heaven to
plunge the authors of such lies and nonsense into the midst of the bottomless pit. They
were, in short, kept in anxiety and dread lest their uncle and master should give them
the slip the moment he found himself somewhat better, and as they feared so it fell
out.
But the author of this history, though he has devoted research and industry to the
discovery of the deeds achieved by Don Quixote in his third sally, has been unable to
obtain any information respecting them, at any rate derived from authentic documents;
tradition has merely preserved in the memory of La Mancha the fact that Don
Quixote, the third time he sallied forth from his home, betook himself to Saragossa,
where he was present at some famous jousts which came off in that city, and that he
had adventures there worthy of his valour and high intelligence. Of his end and death
he could learn no particulars, nor would he have ascertained it or known of it, if good
fortune had not produced an old physician for him who had in his possession a leaden
box, which, according to his account, had been discovered among the crumbling
foundations of an ancient hermitage that was being rebuilt; in which box were found
certain parchment manuscripts in Gothic character, but in Castilian verse, containing
many of his achievements, and setting forth the beauty of Dulcinea, the form of
Rocinante, the fidelity of Sancho Panza, and the burial of Don Quixote himself,
together with sundry epitaphs and eulogies on his life and character; but all that could
be read and deciphered were those which the trustworthy author of this new and
unparalleled history here presents. And the said author asks of those that shall read it
nothing in return for the vast toil which it has cost him in examining and searching the
Manchegan archives in order to bring it to light, save that they give him the same
credit that people of sense give to the books of chivalry that pervade the world and are
so popular; for with this he will consider himself amply paid and fully satisfied, and
will be encouraged to seek out and produce other histories, if not as truthful, at least
equal in invention and not less entertaining. The first words written on the parchment
found in the leaden box were these:
THE ACADEMICIANS OF ARGAMASILLA, A VILLAGE OF LA MANCHA,
ON THE LIFE AND DEATH OF DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA, HOC
SCRIPSERUNT MONICONGO, ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA,
ON THE TOMB OF DON QUIXOTE EPITAPH
The scatterbrain that gave La Mancha more
 Rich spoils than Jason's; who a point so keen
 Had to his wit, and happier far had been
If his wit's weathercock a blunter bore;
The arm renowned far as Gaeta's shore,
 Cathay, and all the lands that lie between;
 The muse discreet and terrible in mien
As ever wrote on brass in days of yore;
He who surpassed the Amadises all,
 And who as naught the Galaors accounted,
 Supported by his love and gallantry:
Who made the Belianises sing small,
 And sought renown on Rocinante mounted;
 Here, underneath this cold stone, doth he lie.
PANIAGUADO, ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA, IN LAUDEM
DULCINEAE DEL TOBOSO
SONNET
She, whose full features may be here descried,
 High-bosomed, with a bearing of disdain,
 Is Dulcinea, she for whom in vain
The great Don Quixote of La Mancha sighed.
For her, Toboso's queen, from side to side
 He traversed the grim sierra, the champaign
 Of Aranjuez, and Montiel's famous plain:
On Rocinante oft a weary ride.
Malignant planets, cruel destiny,
 Pursued them both, the fair Manchegan dame,
And the unconquered star of chivalry.
 Nor youth nor beauty saved her from the claim
Of death; he paid love's bitter penalty,
 And left the marble to preserve his name.
CAPRICHOSO, A MOST ACUTE ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA, IN
PRAISE OF ROCINANTE, STEED OF DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA
SONNET
On that proud throne of diamantine sheen,
 Which the blood-reeking feet of Mars degrade,
The mad Manchegan's banner now hath been
 By him in all its bravery displayed.
 There hath he hung his arms and trenchant blade
Wherewith, achieving deeds till now unseen,
 He slays, lays low, cleaves, hews; but art hath made
A novel style for our new paladin.
If Amadis be the proud boast of Gaul,
 If by his progeny the fame of Greece
 Through all the regions of the earth be spread,
Great Quixote crowned in grim Bellona's hall
 To-day exalts La Mancha over these,
 And above Greece or Gaul she holds her head.
Nor ends his glory here, for his good steed
Doth Brillador and Bayard far exceed;
As mettled steeds compared with Rocinante,
The reputation they have won is scanty.
BURLADOR, ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA, ON SANCHO PANZA
SONNET
 The worthy Sancho Panza here you see;
 A great soul once was in that body small,
 Nor was there squire upon this earthly ball
So plain and simple, or of guile so free.
Within an ace of being Count was he,
 And would have been but for the spite and gall
 Of this vile age, mean and illiberal,
That cannot even let a donkey be.
For mounted on an ass (excuse the word),
 By Rocinante's side this gentle squire
 Was wont his wandering master to attend.
Delusive hopes that lure the common herd
 With promises of ease, the heart's desire,
 In shadows, dreams, and smoke ye always end.
CACHIDIABLO, ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA,
ON THE TOMB OF DON QUIXOTE EPITAPH
The knight lies here below,
 Ill-errant and bruised sore,
 Whom Rocinante bore
In his wanderings to and fro.
By the side of the knight is laid
 Stolid man Sancho too,
 Than whom a squire more true
Was not in the esquire trade.
TIQUITOC, ACADEMICIAN OF ARGAMASILLA, ON THE TOMB OF DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO
 EPITAPH
Here Dulcinea lies.
 Plump was she and robust:
 Now she is ashes and dust:
The end of all flesh that dies.
A lady of high degree,
 With the port of a lofty dame,
 And the great Don Quixote's flame,
And the pride of her village was she.
These were all the verses that could be deciphered; the rest, the writing being wormeaten, were handed over to one of the Academicians to make out their meaning
conjecturally. We have been informed that at the cost of many sleepless nights and
much toil he has succeeded, and that he means to publish them in hopes of Don
Quixote's third sally.
"Forse altro cantera con miglior plectro."
END OF PART I.